it did not take her
wholly by surprize. She frequently gave me hints of it. I remember
her telling me at the ball, that I owed Mrs. Elton gratitude for her
attentions to Miss Fairfax.-- I hope this history of my conduct towards
her will be admitted by you and my father as great extenuation of what
you saw amiss. While you considered me as having sinned against Emma
Woodhouse, I could deserve nothing from either. Acquit me here, and
procure for me, when it is allowable, the acquittal and good wishes of
that said Emma Woodhouse, whom I regard with so much brotherly
affection, as to long to have her as deeply and as happily in love as
myself.-- Whatever strange things I said or did during that fortnight,
you have now a key to. My heart was in Highbury, and my business was
to get my body thither as often as might be, and with the least
suspicion. If you remember any queernesses, set them all to the right
account.-- Of the pianoforte so much talked of, I feel it only
necessary to say, that its being ordered was absolutely unknown to Miss
F--, who would never have allowed me to send it, had any choice been
given her.-- The delicacy of her mind throughout the whole engagement,
my dear madam, is much beyond my power of doing justice to. You will
soon, I earnestly hope, know her thoroughly yourself.-- No description
can describe her. She must tell you herself what she is--yet not by
word, for never was there a human creature who would so designedly
suppress her own merit.--Since I began this letter, which will be
longer than I foresaw, I have heard from her.-- She gives a good
account of her own health; but as she never complains, I dare not
depend. I want to have your opinion of her looks. I know you will
soon call on her; she is living in dread of the visit. Perhaps it is
paid already. Let me hear from you without delay; I am impatient for a
thousand particulars. Remember how few minutes I was at Randalls, and
in how bewildered, how mad a state: and I am not much better yet; still
insane either from happiness or misery. When I think of the kindness
and favour I have met with, of her excellence and patience, and my
uncle's generosity, I am mad with joy: but when I recollect all the
uneasiness I occasioned her, and how little I deserve to be forgiven, I
am mad with anger. If I could but see her again!--But I must not
propose it yet. My uncle has been too good for me to encroach.--I must
still add to this long letter. You have not heard all that you ought
to hear. I could not give any connected detail yesterday; but the
suddenness, and, in one light, the unseasonableness with which the
affair burst out, needs explanation; for though the event of the 26th
ult., as you will conclude, immediately opened to me the happiest
prospects, I should not have presumed on such early measures, but from
the very particular circumstances, which left me not an hour to lose.
I should myself have shrunk from any thing so hasty, and she would have
felt every scruple of mine with multiplied strength and refinement.--
But I had no choice. The hasty engagement she had entered into with
that woman--Here, my dear madam, I was obliged to leave off abruptly,
to recollect and compose myself.--I have been walking over the country,
and am now, I hope, rational enough to make the rest of my letter what
it ought to be.--It is, in fact, a most mortifying retrospect for me.
I behaved shamefully. And here I can admit, that my manners to Miss
W., in being unpleasant to Miss F., were highly blameable. _She_
disapproved them, which ought to have been enough.--My plea of
concealing the truth she did not think sufficient.--She was displeased;
I thought unreasonably so: I thought her, on a thousand occasions,
unnecessarily scrupulous and cautious: I thought her even cold. But
she was always right. If I had followed her judgment, and subdued my
spirits to the level of what she deemed proper, I should have escaped
the greatest unhappiness I have ever known.--We quarrelled.-- Do you
remember the morning spent at Donwell?--_There_ every little
dissatisfaction that had occurred before came to a crisis. I was late;
I met her walking home by herself, and wanted to walk with her, but she
would not suffer it. She absolutely refused to allow me, which I then
thought most unreasonable. Now, however, I see nothing in it but a
very natural and consistent degree of discretion. While I, to blind
the world to our engagement, was behaving one hour with objectionable
particularity to another woman, was she to be consenting the next to a
proposal which might have made every previous caution useless?--Had we
been met walking together between Donwell and Highbury, the truth must
have been suspected.-- I was mad enough, however, to resent.--I doubted
her affection. I doubted it more the next day on Box Hill; when,
provoked by such conduct on my side, such shameful, insolent neglect of
her, and such apparent devotion to Miss W., as it would have been
impossible for any woman of sense to endure, she spoke her resentment
in a form of words perfectly intelligible to me.-- In short, my dear
madam, it was a quarrel blameless on her side, abominable on mine; and
I returned the same evening to Richmond, though I might have staid with
you till the next morning, merely because I would be as angry with her
as possible. Even then, I was not such a fool as not to mean to be
reconciled in time; but I was the injured person, injured by her
coldness, and I went away determined that she should make the first
advances.--I shall always congratulate myself that you were not of the
Box Hill party. Had you witnessed my behaviour there, I can hardly
suppose you would ever have thought well of me again. Its effect upon
her appears in the immediate resolution it produced: as soon as she
found I was really gone from Randalls, she closed with the offer of
that officious Mrs. Elton; the whole system of whose treatment of her,
by the bye, has ever filled me with indignation and hatred. I must not
quarrel with a spirit of