delightful assurance of her total indifference towards
Frank Churchill, of her having a heart completely disengaged from him,
had given birth to the hope, that, in time, he might gain her affection
himself;--but it had been no present hope--he had only, in the
momentary conquest of eagerness over judgment, aspired to be told that
she did not forbid his attempt to attach her.--The superior hopes which
gradually opened were so much the more enchanting.-- The affection,
which he had been asking to be allowed to create, if he could, was
already his!--Within half an hour, he had passed from a thoroughly
distressed state of mind, to something so like perfect happiness, that
it could bear no other name.
_Her_ change was equal.--This one half-hour had given to each the same
precious certainty of being beloved, had cleared from each the same
degree of ignorance, jealousy, or distrust.--On his side, there had
been a long-standing jealousy, old as the arrival, or even the
expectation, of Frank Churchill.--He had been in love with Emma, and
jealous of Frank Churchill, from about the same period, one sentiment
having probably enlightened him as to the other. It was his jealousy
of Frank Churchill that had taken him from the country.--The Box Hill
party had decided him on going away. He would save himself from
witnessing again such permitted, encouraged attentions.--He had gone to
learn to be indifferent.-- But he had gone to a wrong place. There was
too much domestic happiness in his brother's house; woman wore too
amiable a form in it; Isabella was too much like Emma--differing only
in those striking inferiorities, which always brought the other in
brilliancy before him, for much to have been done, even had his time
been longer.--He had stayed on, however, vigorously, day after
day--till this very morning's post had conveyed the history of Jane
Fairfax.--Then, with the gladness which must be felt, nay, which he did
not scruple to feel, having never believed Frank Churchill to be at all
deserving Emma, was there so much fond solicitude, so much keen anxiety
for her, that he could stay no longer. He had ridden home through the
rain; and had walked up directly after dinner, to see how this sweetest
and best of all creatures, faultless in spite of all her faults, bore
the discovery.
He had found her agitated and low.--Frank Churchill was a villain.-- He
heard her declare that she had never loved him. Frank Churchill's
character was not desperate.--She was his own Emma, by hand and word,
when they returned into the house; and if he could have thought of
Frank Churchill then, he might have deemed him a very good sort of
fellow.
CHAPTER XIV
What totally different feelings did Emma take back into the house from
what she had brought out!--she had then been only daring to hope for a
little respite of suffering;--she was now in an exquisite flutter of
happiness, and such happiness moreover as she believed must still be
greater when the flutter should have passed away.
They sat down to tea--the same party round the same table--how often
it had been collected!--and how often had her eyes fallen on the same
shrubs in the lawn, and observed the same beautiful effect of the
western sun!--But never in such a state of spirits, never in any thing
like it; and it was with difficulty that she could summon enough of her
usual self to be the attentive lady of the house, or even the attentive
daughter.
Poor Mr. Woodhouse little suspected what was plotting against him in
the breast of that man whom he was so cordially welcoming, and so
anxiously hoping might not have taken cold from his ride.--Could he
have seen the heart, he would have cared very little for the lungs; but
without the most distant imagination of the impending evil, without the
slightest perception of any thing extraordinary in the looks or ways of
either, he repeated to them very comfortably all the articles of news
he had received from Mr. Perry, and talked on with much
self-contentment, totally unsuspicious of what they could have told him
in return.
As long as Mr. Knightley remained with them, Emma's fever continued;
but when he was gone, she began to be a little tranquillised and
subdued--and in the course of the sleepless night, which was the tax
for such an evening, she found one or two such very serious points to
consider, as made her feel, that even her happiness must have some
alloy. Her father--and Harriet. She could not be alone without
feeling the full weight of their separate claims; and how to guard the
comfort of both to the utmost, was the question. With respect to her
father, it was a question soon answered. She hardly knew yet what Mr.
Knightley would ask; but a very short parley with her own heart
produced the most solemn resolution of never quitting her father.--She
even wept over the idea of it, as a sin of thought. While he lived, it
must be only an engagement; but she flattered herself, that if divested
of the danger of drawing her away, it might become an increase of
comfort to him.-- How to do her best by Harriet, was of more difficult
decision;--how to spare her from any unnecessary pain; how to make her
any possible atonement; how to appear least her enemy?-- On these
subjects, her perplexity and distress were very great--and her mind
had to pass again and again through every bitter reproach and sorrowful
regret that had ever surrounded it.-- She could only resolve at last,
that she would still avoid a meeting with her, and communicate all that
need be told by letter; that it would be inexpressibly desirable to
have her removed just now for a time from Highbury, and--indulging in
one scheme more--nearly resolve, that it might be practicable to get
an invitation for her to Brunswick Square.--Isabella had been pleased
with Harriet; and a few weeks spent in London must give her some
amusement.-- She did not think it in Harriet's nature to escape being
benefited by novelty and variety, by the streets, the shops, and the
children.-- At any rate, it would be a proof of attention and kindness
in herself, from whom every thing was due; a separation for the
present; an averting of the evil day, when they must all be together
again.
She rose early, and wrote her letter to Harriet; an employment which
left her so very serious, so nearly sad, that Mr. Knightley, in