so deep in the business on Miss
Campbell's account--we shall not excuse your being indifferent about
Mr. Elton and Miss Hawkins."
"When I have seen Mr. Elton," replied Jane, "I dare say I shall be
interested--but I believe it requires _that_ with me. And as it is
some months since Miss Campbell married, the impression may be a little
worn off."
"Yes, he has been gone just four weeks, as you observe, Miss
Woodhouse," said Miss Bates, "four weeks yesterday.--A Miss
Hawkins!--Well, I had always rather fancied it would be some young lady
hereabouts; not that I ever--Mrs. Cole once whispered to me--but I
immediately said, 'No, Mr. Elton is a most worthy young man--but'--In
short, I do not think I am particularly quick at those sort of
discoveries. I do not pretend to it. What is before me, I see. At
the same time, nobody could wonder if Mr. Elton should have
aspired--Miss Woodhouse lets me chatter on, so good-humouredly. She
knows I would not offend for the world. How does Miss Smith do? She
seems quite recovered now. Have you heard from Mrs. John Knightley
lately? Oh! those dear little children. Jane, do you know I always
fancy Mr. Dixon like Mr. John Knightley. I mean in person--tall, and
with that sort of look--and not very talkative."
"Quite wrong, my dear aunt; there is no likeness at all."
"Very odd! but one never does form a just idea of any body beforehand.
One takes up a notion, and runs away with it. Mr. Dixon, you say, is
not, strictly speaking, handsome?"
"Handsome! Oh! no--far from it--certainly plain. I told you he was
plain."
"My dear, you said that Miss Campbell would not allow him to be plain,
and that you yourself--"
"Oh! as for me, my judgment is worth nothing. Where I have a regard, I
always think a person well-looking. But I gave what I believed the
general opinion, when I called him plain."
"Well, my dear Jane, I believe we must be running away. The weather
does not look well, and grandmama will be uneasy. You are too
obliging, my dear Miss Woodhouse; but we really must take leave. This
has been a most agreeable piece of news indeed. I shall just go round
by Mrs. Cole's; but I shall not stop three minutes: and, Jane, you had
better go home directly--I would not have you out in a shower!--We
think she is the better for Highbury already. Thank you, we do indeed.
I shall not attempt calling on Mrs. Goddard, for I really do not think
she cares for any thing but _boiled_ pork: when we dress the leg it
will be another thing. Good morning to you, my dear sir. Oh! Mr.
Knightley is coming too. Well, that is so very!--I am sure if Jane is
tired, you will be so kind as to give her your arm.--Mr. Elton, and
Miss Hawkins!--Good morning to you."
Emma, alone with her father, had half her attention wanted by him while
he lamented that young people would be in such a hurry to marry--and
to marry strangers too--and the other half she could give to her own
view of the subject. It was to herself an amusing and a very welcome
piece of news, as proving that Mr. Elton could not have suffered long;
but she was sorry for Harriet: Harriet must feel it--and all that she
could hope was, by giving the first information herself, to save her
from hearing it abruptly from others. It was now about the time that
she was likely to call. If she were to meet Miss Bates in her
way!--and upon its beginning to rain, Emma was obliged to expect that
the weather would be detaining her at Mrs. Goddard's, and that the
intelligence would undoubtedly rush upon her without preparation.
The shower was heavy, but short; and it had not been over five minutes,
when in came Harriet, with just the heated, agitated look which
hurrying thither with a full heart was likely to give; and the "Oh!
Miss Woodhouse, what do you think has happened!" which instantly burst
forth, had all the evidence of corresponding perturbation. As the blow
was given, Emma felt that she could not now shew greater kindness than
in listening; and Harriet, unchecked, ran eagerly through what she had
to tell. "She had set out from Mrs. Goddard's half an hour ago--she
had been afraid it would rain--she had been afraid it would pour down
every moment--but she thought she might get to Hartfield first--she had
hurried on as fast as possible; but then, as she was passing by the
house where a young woman was making up a gown for her, she thought she
would just step in and see how it went on; and though she did not seem
to stay half a moment there, soon after she came out it began to rain,
and she did not know what to do; so she ran on directly, as fast as she
could, and took shelter at Ford's."--Ford's was the principal
woollen-draper, linen-draper, and haberdasher's shop united; the shop
first in size and fashion in the place.--"And so, there she had set,
without an idea of any thing in the world, full ten minutes,
perhaps--when, all of a sudden, who should come in--to be sure it was
so very odd!--but they always dealt at Ford's--who should come in, but
Elizabeth Martin and her brother!-- Dear Miss Woodhouse! only think. I
thought I should have fainted. I did not know what to do. I was
sitting near the door--Elizabeth saw me directly; but he did not; he
was busy with the umbrella. I am sure she saw me, but she looked away
directly, and took no notice; and they both went to quite the farther
end of the shop; and I kept sitting near the door!--Oh! dear; I was so
miserable! I am sure I must have been as white as my gown. I could
not go away you know, because of the rain; but I did so wish myself
anywhere in the world but there.--Oh! dear, Miss Woodhouse--well, at
last, I fancy, he looked round and saw me; for instead of going on with
her buyings, they began whispering to one another. I am sure they were
talking of me; and I could not help thinking that he was persuading her
to speak to me--(do you think he was, Miss Woodhouse?)--for presently
she came forward--came quite up to me, and asked me how I