am losing all my
bitterness against spoilt children, my dearest Emma. I, who am owing
all my happiness to _you_, would not it be horrible ingratitude in me
to be severe on them?"
Emma laughed, and replied: "But I had the assistance of all your
endeavours to counteract the indulgence of other people. I doubt
whether my own sense would have corrected me without it."
"Do you?--I have no doubt. Nature gave you understanding:-- Miss
Taylor gave you principles. You must have done well. My interference
was quite as likely to do harm as good. It was very natural for you to
say, what right has he to lecture me?--and I am afraid very natural
for you to feel that it was done in a disagreeable manner. I do not
believe I did you any good. The good was all to myself, by making you
an object of the tenderest affection to me. I could not think about
you so much without doating on you, faults and all; and by dint of
fancying so many errors, have been in love with you ever since you were
thirteen at least."
"I am sure you were of use to me," cried Emma. "I was very often
influenced rightly by you--oftener than I would own at the time. I am
very sure you did me good. And if poor little Anna Weston is to be
spoiled, it will be the greatest humanity in you to do as much for her
as you have done for me, except falling in love with her when she is
thirteen."
"How often, when you were a girl, have you said to me, with one of your
saucy looks--'Mr. Knightley, I am going to do so-and-so; papa says I
may, or I have Miss Taylor's leave'--something which, you knew, I did
not approve. In such cases my interference was giving you two bad
feelings instead of one."
"What an amiable creature I was!--No wonder you should hold my speeches
in such affectionate remembrance."
"'Mr. Knightley.'--You always called me, 'Mr. Knightley;' and, from
habit, it has not so very formal a sound.--And yet it is formal. I
want you to call me something else, but I do not know what."
"I remember once calling you 'George,' in one of my amiable fits, about
ten years ago. I did it because I thought it would offend you; but, as
you made no objection, I never did it again."
"And cannot you call me 'George' now?"
"Impossible!--I never can call you any thing but 'Mr. Knightley.' I
will not promise even to equal the elegant terseness of Mrs. Elton, by
calling you Mr. K.--But I will promise," she added presently, laughing
and blushing--"I will promise to call you once by your Christian name.
I do not say when, but perhaps you may guess where;--in the building in
which N. takes M. for better, for worse."
Emma grieved that she could not be more openly just to one important
service which his better sense would have rendered her, to the advice
which would have saved her from the worst of all her womanly
follies--her wilful intimacy with Harriet Smith; but it was too tender
a subject.--She could not enter on it.-- Harriet was very seldom
mentioned between them. This, on his side, might merely proceed from
her not being thought of; but Emma was rather inclined to attribute it
to delicacy, and a suspicion, from some appearances, that their
friendship were declining. She was aware herself, that, parting under
any other circumstances, they certainly should have corresponded more,
and that her intelligence would not have rested, as it now almost
wholly did, on Isabella's letters. He might observe that it was so.
The pain of being obliged to practise concealment towards him, was very
little inferior to the pain of having made Harriet unhappy.
Isabella sent quite as good an account of her visitor as could be
expected; on her first arrival she had thought her out of spirits,
which appeared perfectly natural, as there was a dentist to be
consulted; but, since that business had been over, she did not appear
to find Harriet different from what she had known her before.--
Isabella, to be sure, was no very quick observer; yet if Harriet had
not been equal to playing with the children, it would not have escaped
her. Emma's comforts and hopes were most agreeably carried on, by
Harriet's being to stay longer; her fortnight was likely to be a month
at least. Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley were to come down in August, and
she was invited to remain till they could bring her back.
"John does not even mention your friend," said Mr. Knightley. "Here is
his answer, if you like to see it."
It was the answer to the communication of his intended marriage. Emma
accepted it with a very eager hand, with an impatience all alive to
know what he would say about it, and not at all checked by hearing that
her friend was unmentioned.
"John enters like a brother into my happiness," continued Mr.
Knightley, "but he is no complimenter; and though I well know him to
have, likewise, a most brotherly affection for you, he is so far from
making flourishes, that any other young woman might think him rather
cool in her praise. But I am not afraid of your seeing what he writes."
"He writes like a sensible man," replied Emma, when she had read the
letter. "I honour his sincerity. It is very plain that he considers
the good fortune of the engagement as all on my side, but that he is
not without hope of my growing, in time, as worthy of your affection,
as you think me already. Had he said any thing to bear a different
construction, I should not have believed him."
"My Emma, he means no such thing. He only means--"
"He and I should differ very little in our estimation of the two,"
interrupted she, with a sort of serious smile--"much less, perhaps,
than he is aware of, if we could enter without ceremony or reserve on
the subject."
"Emma, my dear Emma--"
"Oh!" she cried with more thorough gaiety, "if you fancy your brother
does not do me justice, only wait till my dear father is in the secret,
and hear his opinion. Depend upon it, he will be much farther from
doing _you_ justice. He will think all the happiness, all the
advantage, on your side of the question; all the merit on mine. I wish
I may