by particular desire, to help Mr.
Weston's judgment; and they were so very closely followed by another
carriage of cousins, who had been entreated to come early with the same
distinguishing earnestness, on the same errand, that it seemed as if
half the company might soon be collected together for the purpose of
preparatory inspection.
Emma perceived that her taste was not the only taste on which Mr.
Weston depended, and felt, that to be the favourite and intimate of a
man who had so many intimates and confidantes, was not the very first
distinction in the scale of vanity. She liked his open manners, but a
little less of open-heartedness would have made him a higher
character.--General benevolence, but not general friendship, made a man
what he ought to be.-- She could fancy such a man. The whole party
walked about, and looked, and praised again; and then, having nothing
else to do, formed a sort of half-circle round the fire, to observe in
their various modes, till other subjects were started, that, though
_May_, a fire in the evening was still very pleasant.
Emma found that it was not Mr. Weston's fault that the number of privy
councillors was not yet larger. They had stopped at Mrs. Bates's door
to offer the use of their carriage, but the aunt and niece were to be
brought by the Eltons.
Frank was standing by her, but not steadily; there was a restlessness,
which shewed a mind not at ease. He was looking about, he was going to
the door, he was watching for the sound of other carriages,--impatient
to begin, or afraid of being always near her.
Mrs. Elton was spoken of. "I think she must be here soon," said he.
"I have a great curiosity to see Mrs. Elton, I have heard so much of
her. It cannot be long, I think, before she comes."
A carriage was heard. He was on the move immediately; but coming back,
said,
"I am forgetting that I am not acquainted with her. I have never seen
either Mr. or Mrs. Elton. I have no business to put myself forward."
Mr. and Mrs. Elton appeared; and all the smiles and the proprieties
passed.
"But Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax!" said Mr. Weston, looking about. "We
thought you were to bring them."
The mistake had been slight. The carriage was sent for them now. Emma
longed to know what Frank's first opinion of Mrs. Elton might be; how
he was affected by the studied elegance of her dress, and her smiles of
graciousness. He was immediately qualifying himself to form an
opinion, by giving her very proper attention, after the introduction
had passed.
In a few minutes the carriage returned.--Somebody talked of rain.-- "I
will see that there are umbrellas, sir," said Frank to his father:
"Miss Bates must not be forgotten:" and away he went. Mr. Weston was
following; but Mrs. Elton detained him, to gratify him by her opinion
of his son; and so briskly did she begin, that the young man himself,
though by no means moving slowly, could hardly be out of hearing.
"A very fine young man indeed, Mr. Weston. You know I candidly told
you I should form my own opinion; and I am happy to say that I am
extremely pleased with him.--You may believe me. I never compliment.
I think him a very handsome young man, and his manners are precisely
what I like and approve--so truly the gentleman, without the least
conceit or puppyism. You must know I have a vast dislike to puppies--
quite a horror of them. They were never tolerated at Maple Grove.
Neither Mr. Suckling nor me had ever any patience with them; and we
used sometimes to say very cutting things! Selina, who is mild almost
to a fault, bore with them much better."
While she talked of his son, Mr. Weston's attention was chained; but
when she got to Maple Grove, he could recollect that there were ladies
just arriving to be attended to, and with happy smiles must hurry away.
Mrs. Elton turned to Mrs. Weston. "I have no doubt of its being our
carriage with Miss Bates and Jane. Our coachman and horses are so
extremely expeditious!--I believe we drive faster than any body.-- What
a pleasure it is to send one's carriage for a friend!-- I understand
you were so kind as to offer, but another time it will be quite
unnecessary. You may be very sure I shall always take care of _them_."
Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax, escorted by the two gentlemen, walked into
the room; and Mrs. Elton seemed to think it as much her duty as Mrs.
Weston's to receive them. Her gestures and movements might be
understood by any one who looked on like Emma; but her words, every
body's words, were soon lost under the incessant flow of Miss Bates,
who came in talking, and had not finished her speech under many minutes
after her being admitted into the circle at the fire. As the door
opened she was heard,
"So very obliging of you!--No rain at all. Nothing to signify. I do
not care for myself. Quite thick shoes. And Jane declares--
Well!--(as soon as she was within the door) Well! This is brilliant
indeed!--This is admirable!--Excellently contrived, upon my word.
Nothing wanting. Could not have imagined it.--So well lighted up!--
Jane, Jane, look!--did you ever see any thing? Oh! Mr. Weston, you
must really have had Aladdin's lamp. Good Mrs. Stokes would not know
her own room again. I saw her as I came in; she was standing in the
entrance. 'Oh! Mrs. Stokes,' said I--but I had not time for more."
She was now met by Mrs. Weston.-- "Very well, I thank you, ma'am. I
hope you are quite well. Very happy to hear it. So afraid you might
have a headache!--seeing you pass by so often, and knowing how much
trouble you must have. Delighted to hear it indeed. Ah! dear Mrs.
Elton, so obliged to you for the carriage!--excellent time. Jane and I
quite ready. Did not keep the horses a moment. Most comfortable
carriage.-- Oh! and I am sure our thanks are due to you, Mrs. Weston,
on that score. Mrs. Elton had most kindly sent Jane a note, or we
should have been.-- But two such offers in one day!--Never were such
neighbours. I said to my mother, 'Upon my word, ma'am--.' Thank you,
my mother is remarkably well. Gone to Mr. Woodhouse's. I made her take
her