at dear Highbury again."
A very friendly shake of the hand, a very earnest "Good-bye," closed
the speech, and the door had soon shut out Frank Churchill. Short had
been the notice--short their meeting; he was gone; and Emma felt so
sorry to part, and foresaw so great a loss to their little society from
his absence as to begin to be afraid of being too sorry, and feeling it
too much.
It was a sad change. They had been meeting almost every day since his
arrival. Certainly his being at Randalls had given great spirit to the
last two weeks--indescribable spirit; the idea, the expectation of
seeing him which every morning had brought, the assurance of his
attentions, his liveliness, his manners! It had been a very happy
fortnight, and forlorn must be the sinking from it into the common
course of Hartfield days. To complete every other recommendation, he
had _almost_ told her that he loved her. What strength, or what
constancy of affection he might be subject to, was another point; but
at present she could not doubt his having a decidedly warm admiration,
a conscious preference of herself; and this persuasion, joined to all
the rest, made her think that she _must_ be a little in love with him,
in spite of every previous determination against it.
"I certainly must," said she. "This sensation of listlessness,
weariness, stupidity, this disinclination to sit down and employ
myself, this feeling of every thing's being dull and insipid about the
house!-- I must be in love; I should be the oddest creature in the
world if I were not--for a few weeks at least. Well! evil to some is
always good to others. I shall have many fellow-mourners for the ball,
if not for Frank Churchill; but Mr. Knightley will be happy. He may
spend the evening with his dear William Larkins now if he likes."
Mr. Knightley, however, shewed no triumphant happiness. He could not
say that he was sorry on his own account; his very cheerful look would
have contradicted him if he had; but he said, and very steadily, that
he was sorry for the disappointment of the others, and with
considerable kindness added,
"You, Emma, who have so few opportunities of dancing, you are really
out of luck; you are very much out of luck!"
It was some days before she saw Jane Fairfax, to judge of her honest
regret in this woeful change; but when they did meet, her composure was
odious. She had been particularly unwell, however, suffering from
headache to a degree, which made her aunt declare, that had the ball
taken place, she did not think Jane could have attended it; and it was
charity to impute some of her unbecoming indifference to the languor of
ill-health.
CHAPTER XIII
Emma continued to entertain no doubt of her being in love. Her ideas
only varied as to the how much. At first, she thought it was a good
deal; and afterwards, but little. She had great pleasure in hearing
Frank Churchill talked of; and, for his sake, greater pleasure than
ever in seeing Mr. and Mrs. Weston; she was very often thinking of him,
and quite impatient for a letter, that she might know how he was, how
were his spirits, how was his aunt, and what was the chance of his
coming to Randalls again this spring. But, on the other hand, she
could not admit herself to be unhappy, nor, after the first morning, to
be less disposed for employment than usual; she was still busy and
cheerful; and, pleasing as he was, she could yet imagine him to have
faults; and farther, though thinking of him so much, and, as she sat
drawing or working, forming a thousand amusing schemes for the progress
and close of their attachment, fancying interesting dialogues, and
inventing elegant letters; the conclusion of every imaginary
declaration on his side was that she _refused_ _him_. Their affection
was always to subside into friendship. Every thing tender and charming
was to mark their parting; but still they were to part. When she
became sensible of this, it struck her that she could not be very much
in love; for in spite of her previous and fixed determination never to
quit her father, never to marry, a strong attachment certainly must
produce more of a struggle than she could foresee in her own feelings.
"I do not find myself making any use of the word _sacrifice_," said
she.-- "In not one of all my clever replies, my delicate negatives, is
there any allusion to making a sacrifice. I do suspect that he is not
really necessary to my happiness. So much the better. I certainly
will not persuade myself to feel more than I do. I am quite enough in
love. I should be sorry to be more."
Upon the whole, she was equally contented with her view of his feelings.
"_He_ is undoubtedly very much in love--every thing denotes it--very
much in love indeed!--and when he comes again, if his affection
continue, I must be on my guard not to encourage it.--It would be most
inexcusable to do otherwise, as my own mind is quite made up. Not that
I imagine he can think I have been encouraging him hitherto. No, if he
had believed me at all to share his feelings, he would not have been so
wretched. Could he have thought himself encouraged, his looks and
language at parting would have been different.-- Still, however, I must
be on my guard. This is in the supposition of his attachment
continuing what it now is; but I do not know that I expect it will; I
do not look upon him to be quite the sort of man-- I do not altogether
build upon his steadiness or constancy.-- His feelings are warm, but I
can imagine them rather changeable.-- Every consideration of the
subject, in short, makes me thankful that my happiness is not more
deeply involved.--I shall do very well again after a little while--and
then, it will be a good thing over; for they say every body is in love
once in their lives, and I shall have been let off easily."
When his letter to Mrs. Weston arrived, Emma had the perusal of it; and
she read it with a degree of pleasure and admiration which made her at
first shake her head over her own sensations, and think she had
undervalued their strength. It was a long, well-written letter, giving
the particulars of his