him seize
every possible moment for darting his eye towards it, and it was not
long before he saw it to be _Dixon_. Jane Fairfax's perception seemed
to accompany his; her comprehension was certainly more equal to the
covert meaning, the superior intelligence, of those five letters so
arranged. She was evidently displeased; looked up, and seeing herself
watched, blushed more deeply than he had ever perceived her, and saying
only, "I did not know that proper names were allowed," pushed away the
letters with even an angry spirit, and looked resolved to be engaged by
no other word that could be offered. Her face was averted from those
who had made the attack, and turned towards her aunt.
"Aye, very true, my dear," cried the latter, though Jane had not spoken
a word--"I was just going to say the same thing. It is time for us to
be going indeed. The evening is closing in, and grandmama will be
looking for us. My dear sir, you are too obliging. We really must
wish you good night."
Jane's alertness in moving, proved her as ready as her aunt had
preconceived. She was immediately up, and wanting to quit the table;
but so many were also moving, that she could not get away; and Mr.
Knightley thought he saw another collection of letters anxiously pushed
towards her, and resolutely swept away by her unexamined. She was
afterwards looking for her shawl--Frank Churchill was looking also--it
was growing dusk, and the room was in confusion; and how they parted,
Mr. Knightley could not tell.
He remained at Hartfield after all the rest, his thoughts full of what
he had seen; so full, that when the candles came to assist his
observations, he must--yes, he certainly must, as a friend--an anxious
friend--give Emma some hint, ask her some question. He could not see
her in a situation of such danger, without trying to preserve her. It
was his duty.
"Pray, Emma," said he, "may I ask in what lay the great amusement, the
poignant sting of the last word given to you and Miss Fairfax? I saw
the word, and am curious to know how it could be so very entertaining
to the one, and so very distressing to the other."
Emma was extremely confused. She could not endure to give him the true
explanation; for though her suspicions were by no means removed, she
was really ashamed of having ever imparted them.
"Oh!" she cried in evident embarrassment, "it all meant nothing; a mere
joke among ourselves."
"The joke," he replied gravely, "seemed confined to you and Mr.
Churchill."
He had hoped she would speak again, but she did not. She would rather
busy herself about any thing than speak. He sat a little while in
doubt. A variety of evils crossed his mind. Interference--fruitless
interference. Emma's confusion, and the acknowledged intimacy, seemed
to declare her affection engaged. Yet he would speak. He owed it to
her, to risk any thing that might be involved in an unwelcome
interference, rather than her welfare; to encounter any thing, rather
than the remembrance of neglect in such a cause.
"My dear Emma," said he at last, with earnest kindness, "do you think
you perfectly understand the degree of acquaintance between the
gentleman and lady we have been speaking of?"
"Between Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss Fairfax? Oh! yes, perfectly.--
Why do you make a doubt of it?"
"Have you never at any time had reason to think that he admired her, or
that she admired him?"
"Never, never!" she cried with a most open eagerness--"Never, for the
twentieth part of a moment, did such an idea occur to me. And how
could it possibly come into your head?"
"I have lately imagined that I saw symptoms of attachment between
them--certain expressive looks, which I did not believe meant to be
public."
"Oh! you amuse me excessively. I am delighted to find that you can
vouchsafe to let your imagination wander--but it will not do--very
sorry to check you in your first essay--but indeed it will not do.
There is no admiration between them, I do assure you; and the
appearances which have caught you, have arisen from some peculiar
circumstances--feelings rather of a totally different nature--it is
impossible exactly to explain:--there is a good deal of nonsense in
it--but the part which is capable of being communicated, which is
sense, is, that they are as far from any attachment or admiration for
one another, as any two beings in the world can be. That is, I
_presume_ it to be so on her side, and I can _answer_ for its being so
on his. I will answer for the gentleman's indifference."
She spoke with a confidence which staggered, with a satisfaction which
silenced, Mr. Knightley. She was in gay spirits, and would have
prolonged the conversation, wanting to hear the particulars of his
suspicions, every look described, and all the wheres and hows of a
circumstance which highly entertained her: but his gaiety did not meet
hers. He found he could not be useful, and his feelings were too much
irritated for talking. That he might not be irritated into an absolute
fever, by the fire which Mr. Woodhouse's tender habits required almost
every evening throughout the year, he soon afterwards took a hasty
leave, and walked home to the coolness and solitude of Donwell Abbey.
CHAPTER VI
After being long fed with hopes of a speedy visit from Mr. and Mrs.
Suckling, the Highbury world were obliged to endure the mortification
of hearing that they could not possibly come till the autumn. No such
importation of novelties could enrich their intellectual stores at
present. In the daily interchange of news, they must be again
restricted to the other topics with which for a while the Sucklings'
coming had been united, such as the last accounts of Mrs. Churchill,
whose health seemed every day to supply a different report, and the
situation of Mrs. Weston, whose happiness it was to be hoped might
eventually be as much increased by the arrival of a child, as that of
all her neighbours was by the approach of it.
Mrs. Elton was very much disappointed. It was the delay of a great
deal of pleasure and parade. Her introductions and recommendations
must all wait, and every projected party be still only talked of. So
she thought at first;--but a little consideration convinced her that
every thing need not be put off. Why should not they explore to Box
Hill though the Sucklings did not come? They could go