walking
up to Hartfield to breakfast, did not arrive at all too soon; and half
an hour stolen afterwards to go over the same ground again with him,
literally and figuratively, was quite necessary to reinstate her in a
proper share of the happiness of the evening before.
He had not left her long, by no means long enough for her to have the
slightest inclination for thinking of any body else, when a letter was
brought her from Randalls--a very thick letter;--she guessed what it
must contain, and deprecated the necessity of reading it.-- She was now
in perfect charity with Frank Churchill; she wanted no explanations,
she wanted only to have her thoughts to herself--and as for
understanding any thing he wrote, she was sure she was incapable of
it.--It must be waded through, however. She opened the packet; it was
too surely so;--a note from Mrs. Weston to herself, ushered in the
letter from Frank to Mrs. Weston.
"I have the greatest pleasure, my dear Emma, in forwarding to you the
enclosed. I know what thorough justice you will do it, and have
scarcely a doubt of its happy effect.--I think we shall never
materially disagree about the writer again; but I will not delay you by
a long preface.--We are quite well.--This letter has been the cure of
all the little nervousness I have been feeling lately.--I did not quite
like your looks on Tuesday, but it was an ungenial morning; and though
you will never own being affected by weather, I think every body feels
a north-east wind.--I felt for your dear father very much in the storm
of Tuesday afternoon and yesterday morning, but had the comfort of
hearing last night, by Mr. Perry, that it had not made him ill.
"Yours ever,
"A. W."
[To Mrs. Weston.]
WINDSOR-JULY.
MY DEAR MADAM,
"If I made myself intelligible yesterday, this letter will be expected;
but expected or not, I know it will be read with candour and
indulgence.--You are all goodness, and I believe there will be need of
even all your goodness to allow for some parts of my past conduct.--
But I have been forgiven by one who had still more to resent. My
courage rises while I write. It is very difficult for the prosperous
to be humble. I have already met with such success in two applications
for pardon, that I may be in danger of thinking myself too sure of
yours, and of those among your friends who have had any ground of
offence.--You must all endeavour to comprehend the exact nature of my
situation when I first arrived at Randalls; you must consider me as
having a secret which was to be kept at all hazards. This was the
fact. My right to place myself in a situation requiring such
concealment, is another question. I shall not discuss it here. For my
temptation to _think_ it a right, I refer every caviller to a brick
house, sashed windows below, and casements above, in Highbury. I dared
not address her openly; my difficulties in the then state of Enscombe
must be too well known to require definition; and I was fortunate
enough to prevail, before we parted at Weymouth, and to induce the most
upright female mind in the creation to stoop in charity to a secret
engagement.--Had she refused, I should have gone mad.--But you will be
ready to say, what was your hope in doing this?--What did you look
forward to?--To any thing, every thing--to time, chance, circumstance,
slow effects, sudden bursts, perseverance and weariness, health and
sickness. Every possibility of good was before me, and the first of
blessings secured, in obtaining her promises of faith and
correspondence. If you need farther explanation, I have the honour, my
dear madam, of being your husband's son, and the advantage of
inheriting a disposition to hope for good, which no inheritance of
houses or lands can ever equal the value of.--See me, then, under these
circumstances, arriving on my first visit to Randalls;--and here I am
conscious of wrong, for that visit might have been sooner paid. You
will look back and see that I did not come till Miss Fairfax was in
Highbury; and as _you_ were the person slighted, you will forgive me
instantly; but I must work on my father's compassion, by reminding him,
that so long as I absented myself from his house, so long I lost the
blessing of knowing you. My behaviour, during the very happy fortnight
which I spent with you, did not, I hope, lay me open to reprehension,
excepting on one point. And now I come to the principal, the only
important part of my conduct while belonging to you, which excites my
own anxiety, or requires very solicitous explanation. With the
greatest respect, and the warmest friendship, do I mention Miss
Woodhouse; my father perhaps will think I ought to add, with the
deepest humiliation.-- A few words which dropped from him yesterday
spoke his opinion, and some censure I acknowledge myself liable to.--My
behaviour to Miss Woodhouse indicated, I believe, more than it ought.--
In order to assist a concealment so essential to me, I was led on to
make more than an allowable use of the sort of intimacy into which we
were immediately thrown.--I cannot deny that Miss Woodhouse was my
ostensible object--but I am sure you will believe the declaration, that
had I not been convinced of her indifference, I would not have been
induced by any selfish views to go on.-- Amiable and delightful as Miss
Woodhouse is, she never gave me the idea of a young woman likely to be
attached; and that she was perfectly free from any tendency to being
attached to me, was as much my conviction as my wish.--She received my
attentions with an easy, friendly, goodhumoured playfulness, which
exactly suited me. We seemed to understand each other. From our
relative situation, those attentions were her due, and were felt to be
so.--Whether Miss Woodhouse began really to understand me before the
expiration of that fortnight, I cannot say;--when I called to take
leave of her, I remember that I was within a moment of confessing the
truth, and I then fancied she was not without suspicion; but I have no
doubt of her having since detected me, at least in some degree.-- She
may not have surmised the whole, but her quickness must have penetrated
a part. I cannot doubt it. You will find, whenever the subject
becomes freed from its present restraints, that