to keep her father from the knowledge of
what had passed,--aware of the anxiety and alarm it would occasion: but
she soon felt that concealment must be impossible. Within half an hour
it was known all over Highbury. It was the very event to engage those
who talk most, the young and the low; and all the youth and servants in
the place were soon in the happiness of frightful news. The last
night's ball seemed lost in the gipsies. Poor Mr. Woodhouse trembled
as he sat, and, as Emma had foreseen, would scarcely be satisfied
without their promising never to go beyond the shrubbery again. It was
some comfort to him that many inquiries after himself and Miss
Woodhouse (for his neighbours knew that he loved to be inquired after),
as well as Miss Smith, were coming in during the rest of the day; and
he had the pleasure of returning for answer, that they were all very
indifferent--which, though not exactly true, for she was perfectly
well, and Harriet not much otherwise, Emma would not interfere with.
She had an unhappy state of health in general for the child of such a
man, for she hardly knew what indisposition was; and if he did not
invent illnesses for her, she could make no figure in a message.
The gipsies did not wait for the operations of justice; they took
themselves off in a hurry. The young ladies of Highbury might have
walked again in safety before their panic began, and the whole history
dwindled soon into a matter of little importance but to Emma and her
nephews:--in her imagination it maintained its ground, and Henry and
John were still asking every day for the story of Harriet and the
gipsies, and still tenaciously setting her right if she varied in the
slightest particular from the original recital.
CHAPTER IV
A very few days had passed after this adventure, when Harriet came one
morning to Emma with a small parcel in her hand, and after sitting down
and hesitating, thus began:
"Miss Woodhouse--if you are at leisure--I have something that I should
like to tell you--a sort of confession to make--and then, you know, it
will be over."
Emma was a good deal surprized; but begged her to speak. There was a
seriousness in Harriet's manner which prepared her, quite as much as
her words, for something more than ordinary.
"It is my duty, and I am sure it is my wish," she continued, "to have
no reserves with you on this subject. As I am happily quite an altered
creature in _one_ _respect_, it is very fit that you should have the
satisfaction of knowing it. I do not want to say more than is
necessary--I am too much ashamed of having given way as I have done,
and I dare say you understand me."
"Yes," said Emma, "I hope I do."
"How I could so long a time be fancying myself! . . ." cried Harriet,
warmly. "It seems like madness! I can see nothing at all
extraordinary in him now.--I do not care whether I meet him or
not--except that of the two I had rather not see him--and indeed I
would go any distance round to avoid him--but I do not envy his wife in
the least; I neither admire her nor envy her, as I have done: she is
very charming, I dare say, and all that, but I think her very
ill-tempered and disagreeable--I shall never forget her look the other
night!--However, I assure you, Miss Woodhouse, I wish her no evil.--No,
let them be ever so happy together, it will not give me another
moment's pang: and to convince you that I have been speaking truth, I
am now going to destroy--what I ought to have destroyed long ago--what
I ought never to have kept-- I know that very well (blushing as she
spoke).--However, now I will destroy it all--and it is my particular
wish to do it in your presence, that you may see how rational I am
grown. Cannot you guess what this parcel holds?" said she, with a
conscious look.
"Not the least in the world.--Did he ever give you any thing?"
"No--I cannot call them gifts; but they are things that I have valued
very much."
She held the parcel towards her, and Emma read the words _Most_
_precious_ _treasures_ on the top. Her curiosity was greatly excited.
Harriet unfolded the parcel, and she looked on with impatience. Within
abundance of silver paper was a pretty little Tunbridge-ware box, which
Harriet opened: it was well lined with the softest cotton; but,
excepting the cotton, Emma saw only a small piece of court-plaister.
"Now," said Harriet, "you _must_ recollect."
"No, indeed I do not."
"Dear me! I should not have thought it possible you could forget what
passed in this very room about court-plaister, one of the very last
times we ever met in it!--It was but a very few days before I had my
sore throat--just before Mr. and Mrs. John Knightley came-- I think the
very evening.--Do not you remember his cutting his finger with your new
penknife, and your recommending court-plaister?-- But, as you had none
about you, and knew I had, you desired me to supply him; and so I took
mine out and cut him a piece; but it was a great deal too large, and he
cut it smaller, and kept playing some time with what was left, before
he gave it back to me. And so then, in my nonsense, I could not help
making a treasure of it--so I put it by never to be used, and looked
at it now and then as a great treat."
"My dearest Harriet!" cried Emma, putting her hand before her face, and
jumping up, "you make me more ashamed of myself than I can bear.
Remember it? Aye, I remember it all now; all, except your saving this
relic--I knew nothing of that till this moment--but the cutting the
finger, and my recommending court-plaister, and saying I had none about
me!--Oh! my sins, my sins!--And I had plenty all the while in my
pocket!--One of my senseless tricks!--I deserve to be under a continual
blush all the rest of my life.--Well--(sitting down again)--go
on--what else?"
"And had you really some at hand yourself? I am sure I never suspected
it, you did it so naturally."
"And so you actually put this piece of court-plaister by for his sake!"
said Emma, recovering from her state of shame and feeling divided
between