forbearance which has been so richly extended
towards myself; but, otherwise, I should loudly protest against the
share of it which that woman has known.-- 'Jane,' indeed!--You will
observe that I have not yet indulged myself in calling her by that
name, even to you. Think, then, what I must have endured in hearing it
bandied between the Eltons with all the vulgarity of needless
repetition, and all the insolence of imaginary superiority. Have
patience with me, I shall soon have done.-- She closed with this offer,
resolving to break with me entirely, and wrote the next day to tell me
that we never were to meet again.-- _She_ _felt_ _the_ _engagement_
_to_ _be_ _a_ _source_ _of_ _repentance_ _and_ _misery_ _to_ _each_:
_she_ _dissolved_ _it_.--This letter reached me on the very morning of
my poor aunt's death. I answered it within an hour; but from the
confusion of my mind, and the multiplicity of business falling on me at
once, my answer, instead of being sent with all the many other letters
of that day, was locked up in my writing-desk; and I, trusting that I
had written enough, though but a few lines, to satisfy her, remained
without any uneasiness.--I was rather disappointed that I did not hear
from her again speedily; but I made excuses for her, and was too busy,
and--may I add?-- too cheerful in my views to be captious.--We removed
to Windsor; and two days afterwards I received a parcel from her, my
own letters all returned!--and a few lines at the same time by the
post, stating her extreme surprize at not having had the smallest reply
to her last; and adding, that as silence on such a point could not be
misconstrued, and as it must be equally desirable to both to have every
subordinate arrangement concluded as soon as possible, she now sent me,
by a safe conveyance, all my letters, and requested, that if I could
not directly command hers, so as to send them to Highbury within a
week, I would forward them after that period to her at--: in short,
the full direction to Mr. Smallridge's, near Bristol, stared me in the
face. I knew the name, the place, I knew all about it, and instantly
saw what she had been doing. It was perfectly accordant with that
resolution of character which I knew her to possess; and the secrecy
she had maintained, as to any such design in her former letter, was
equally descriptive of its anxious delicacy. For the world would not
she have seemed to threaten me.--Imagine the shock; imagine how, till I
had actually detected my own blunder, I raved at the blunders of the
post.-- What was to be done?--One thing only.--I must speak to my
uncle. Without his sanction I could not hope to be listened to
again.-- I spoke; circumstances were in my favour; the late event had
softened away his pride, and he was, earlier than I could have
anticipated, wholly reconciled and complying; and could say at last,
poor man! with a deep sigh, that he wished I might find as much
happiness in the marriage state as he had done.--I felt that it would
be of a different sort.--Are you disposed to pity me for what I must
have suffered in opening the cause to him, for my suspense while all
was at stake?--No; do not pity me till I reached Highbury, and saw how
ill I had made her. Do not pity me till I saw her wan, sick looks.--I
reached Highbury at the time of day when, from my knowledge of their
late breakfast hour, I was certain of a good chance of finding her
alone.--I was not disappointed; and at last I was not disappointed
either in the object of my journey. A great deal of very reasonable,
very just displeasure I had to persuade away. But it is done; we are
reconciled, dearer, much dearer, than ever, and no moment's uneasiness
can ever occur between us again. Now, my dear madam, I will release
you; but I could not conclude before. A thousand and a thousand thanks
for all the kindness you have ever shewn me, and ten thousand for the
attentions your heart will dictate towards her.--If you think me in a
way to be happier than I deserve, I am quite of your opinion.--Miss W.
calls me the child of good fortune. I hope she is right.--In one
respect, my good fortune is undoubted, that of being able to subscribe
myself,
Your obliged and affectionate Son,
F. C. WESTON CHURCHILL.
CHAPTER XV
This letter must make its way to Emma's feelings. She was obliged, in
spite of her previous determination to the contrary, to do it all the
justice that Mrs. Weston foretold. As soon as she came to her own
name, it was irresistible; every line relating to herself was
interesting, and almost every line agreeable; and when this charm
ceased, the subject could still maintain itself, by the natural return
of her former regard for the writer, and the very strong attraction
which any picture of love must have for her at that moment. She never
stopt till she had gone through the whole; and though it was impossible
not to feel that he had been wrong, yet he had been less wrong than she
had supposed--and he had suffered, and was very sorry--and he was so
grateful to Mrs. Weston, and so much in love with Miss Fairfax, and she
was so happy herself, that there was no being severe; and could he have
entered the room, she must have shaken hands with him as heartily as
ever.
She thought so well of the letter, that when Mr. Knightley came again,
she desired him to read it. She was sure of Mrs. Weston's wishing it
to be communicated; especially to one, who, like Mr. Knightley, had
seen so much to blame in his conduct.
"I shall be very glad to look it over," said he; "but it seems long. I
will take it home with me at night."
But that would not do. Mr. Weston was to call in the evening, and she
must return it by him.
"I would rather be talking to you," he replied; "but as it seems a
matter of justice, it shall be done."
He began--stopping, however, almost directly to say, "Had I been
offered the sight of one of this gentleman's letters to his
mother-in-law a few months ago, Emma, it would not have been taken