in a more broken
and subdued accent, "The feelings of the warmest
friendship--Indignation--Abominable scoundrel!"-- And in a louder,
steadier tone, he concluded with, "He will soon be gone. They will
soon be in Yorkshire. I am sorry for _her_. She deserves a better
fate."
Emma understood him; and as soon as she could recover from the flutter
of pleasure, excited by such tender consideration, replied,
"You are very kind--but you are mistaken--and I must set you right.-- I
am not in want of that sort of compassion. My blindness to what was
going on, led me to act by them in a way that I must always be ashamed
of, and I was very foolishly tempted to say and do many things which
may well lay me open to unpleasant conjectures, but I have no other
reason to regret that I was not in the secret earlier."
"Emma!" cried he, looking eagerly at her, "are you, indeed?"--but
checking himself--"No, no, I understand you--forgive me--I am pleased
that you can say even so much.--He is no object of regret, indeed! and
it will not be very long, I hope, before that becomes the
acknowledgment of more than your reason.--Fortunate that your
affections were not farther entangled!--I could never, I confess, from
your manners, assure myself as to the degree of what you felt-- I could
only be certain that there was a preference--and a preference which I
never believed him to deserve.--He is a disgrace to the name of
man.--And is he to be rewarded with that sweet young woman?-- Jane,
Jane, you will be a miserable creature."
"Mr. Knightley," said Emma, trying to be lively, but really confused--
"I am in a very extraordinary situation. I cannot let you continue in
your error; and yet, perhaps, since my manners gave such an impression,
I have as much reason to be ashamed of confessing that I never have
been at all attached to the person we are speaking of, as it might be
natural for a woman to feel in confessing exactly the reverse.-- But I
never have."
He listened in perfect silence. She wished him to speak, but he would
not. She supposed she must say more before she were entitled to his
clemency; but it was a hard case to be obliged still to lower herself
in his opinion. She went on, however.
"I have very little to say for my own conduct.--I was tempted by his
attentions, and allowed myself to appear pleased.-- An old story,
probably--a common case--and no more than has happened to hundreds of
my sex before; and yet it may not be the more excusable in one who sets
up as I do for Understanding. Many circumstances assisted the
temptation. He was the son of Mr. Weston--he was continually here--I
always found him very pleasant--and, in short, for (with a sigh) let me
swell out the causes ever so ingeniously, they all centre in this at
last--my vanity was flattered, and I allowed his attentions. Latterly,
however--for some time, indeed--I have had no idea of their meaning
any thing.--I thought them a habit, a trick, nothing that called for
seriousness on my side. He has imposed on me, but he has not injured
me. I have never been attached to him. And now I can tolerably
comprehend his behaviour. He never wished to attach me. It was merely
a blind to conceal his real situation with another.--It was his object
to blind all about him; and no one, I am sure, could be more
effectually blinded than myself--except that I was _not_ blinded--that
it was my good fortune--that, in short, I was somehow or other safe
from him."
She had hoped for an answer here--for a few words to say that her
conduct was at least intelligible; but he was silent; and, as far as
she could judge, deep in thought. At last, and tolerably in his usual
tone, he said,
"I have never had a high opinion of Frank Churchill.--I can suppose,
however, that I may have underrated him. My acquaintance with him has
been but trifling.--And even if I have not underrated him hitherto, he
may yet turn out well.--With such a woman he has a chance.--I have no
motive for wishing him ill--and for her sake, whose happiness will be
involved in his good character and conduct, I shall certainly wish him
well."
"I have no doubt of their being happy together," said Emma; "I believe
them to be very mutually and very sincerely attached."
"He is a most fortunate man!" returned Mr. Knightley, with energy. "So
early in life--at three-and-twenty--a period when, if a man chuses a
wife, he generally chuses ill. At three-and-twenty to have drawn such
a prize! What years of felicity that man, in all human calculation,
has before him!--Assured of the love of such a woman--the disinterested
love, for Jane Fairfax's character vouches for her disinterestedness;
every thing in his favour,--equality of situation--I mean, as far as
regards society, and all the habits and manners that are important;
equality in every point but one--and that one, since the purity of her
heart is not to be doubted, such as must increase his felicity, for it
will be his to bestow the only advantages she wants.--A man would
always wish to give a woman a better home than the one he takes her
from; and he who can do it, where there is no doubt of _her_ regard,
must, I think, be the happiest of mortals.--Frank Churchill is, indeed,
the favourite of fortune. Every thing turns out for his good.--He
meets with a young woman at a watering-place, gains her affection,
cannot even weary her by negligent treatment--and had he and all his
family sought round the world for a perfect wife for him, they could
not have found her superior.--His aunt is in the way.--His aunt
dies.--He has only to speak.--His friends are eager to promote his
happiness.-- He had used every body ill--and they are all delighted to
forgive him.-- He is a fortunate man indeed!"
"You speak as if you envied him."
"And I do envy him, Emma. In one respect he is the object of my envy."
Emma could say no more. They seemed to be within half a sentence of
Harriet, and her immediate feeling was to avert the subject, if
possible. She made her plan; she would speak of something totally
different--the children in Brunswick Square; and she only waited for
breath to begin, when Mr. Knightley startled her, by saying,
"You will not ask me what is