found her very persuadable.-- Harriet was to go; she was invited
for at least a fortnight; she was to be conveyed in Mr. Woodhouse's
carriage.--It was all arranged, it was all completed, and Harriet was
safe in Brunswick Square.
Now Emma could, indeed, enjoy Mr. Knightley's visits; now she could
talk, and she could listen with true happiness, unchecked by that sense
of injustice, of guilt, of something most painful, which had haunted
her when remembering how disappointed a heart was near her, how much
might at that moment, and at a little distance, be enduring by the
feelings which she had led astray herself.
The difference of Harriet at Mrs. Goddard's, or in London, made perhaps
an unreasonable difference in Emma's sensations; but she could not
think of her in London without objects of curiosity and employment,
which must be averting the past, and carrying her out of herself.
She would not allow any other anxiety to succeed directly to the place
in her mind which Harriet had occupied. There was a communication
before her, one which _she_ only could be competent to make--the
confession of her engagement to her father; but she would have nothing
to do with it at present.--She had resolved to defer the disclosure
till Mrs. Weston were safe and well. No additional agitation should be
thrown at this period among those she loved--and the evil should not
act on herself by anticipation before the appointed time.--A fortnight,
at least, of leisure and peace of mind, to crown every warmer, but more
agitating, delight, should be hers.
She soon resolved, equally as a duty and a pleasure, to employ half an
hour of this holiday of spirits in calling on Miss Fairfax.-- She ought
to go--and she was longing to see her; the resemblance of their present
situations increasing every other motive of goodwill. It would be a
_secret_ satisfaction; but the consciousness of a similarity of
prospect would certainly add to the interest with which she should
attend to any thing Jane might communicate.
She went--she had driven once unsuccessfully to the door, but had not
been into the house since the morning after Box Hill, when poor Jane
had been in such distress as had filled her with compassion, though all
the worst of her sufferings had been unsuspected.-- The fear of being
still unwelcome, determined her, though assured of their being at home,
to wait in the passage, and send up her name.-- She heard Patty
announcing it; but no such bustle succeeded as poor Miss Bates had
before made so happily intelligible.--No; she heard nothing but the
instant reply of, "Beg her to walk up;"--and a moment afterwards she
was met on the stairs by Jane herself, coming eagerly forward, as if no
other reception of her were felt sufficient.-- Emma had never seen her
look so well, so lovely, so engaging. There was consciousness,
animation, and warmth; there was every thing which her countenance or
manner could ever have wanted.-- She came forward with an offered hand;
and said, in a low, but very feeling tone,
"This is most kind, indeed!--Miss Woodhouse, it is impossible for me to
express--I hope you will believe--Excuse me for being so entirely
without words."
Emma was gratified, and would soon have shewn no want of words, if the
sound of Mrs. Elton's voice from the sitting-room had not checked her,
and made it expedient to compress all her friendly and all her
congratulatory sensations into a very, very earnest shake of the hand.
Mrs. Bates and Mrs. Elton were together. Miss Bates was out, which
accounted for the previous tranquillity. Emma could have wished Mrs.
Elton elsewhere; but she was in a humour to have patience with every
body; and as Mrs. Elton met her with unusual graciousness, she hoped
the rencontre would do them no harm.
She soon believed herself to penetrate Mrs. Elton's thoughts, and
understand why she was, like herself, in happy spirits; it was being in
Miss Fairfax's confidence, and fancying herself acquainted with what
was still a secret to other people. Emma saw symptoms of it
immediately in the expression of her face; and while paying her own
compliments to Mrs. Bates, and appearing to attend to the good old
lady's replies, she saw her with a sort of anxious parade of mystery
fold up a letter which she had apparently been reading aloud to Miss
Fairfax, and return it into the purple and gold reticule by her side,
saying, with significant nods,
"We can finish this some other time, you know. You and I shall not
want opportunities. And, in fact, you have heard all the essential
already. I only wanted to prove to you that Mrs. S. admits our
apology, and is not offended. You see how delightfully she writes.
Oh! she is a sweet creature! You would have doated on her, had you
gone.--But not a word more. Let us be discreet--quite on our good
behaviour.--Hush!--You remember those lines-- I forget the poem at this
moment:
"For when a lady's in the case,
"You know all other things give place."
Now I say, my dear, in _our_ case, for _lady_, read----mum! a word to
the wise.--I am in a fine flow of spirits, an't I? But I want to set
your heart at ease as to Mrs. S.--_My_ representation, you see, has
quite appeased her."
And again, on Emma's merely turning her head to look at Mrs. Bates's
knitting, she added, in a half whisper,
"I mentioned no _names_, you will observe.--Oh! no; cautious as a
minister of state. I managed it extremely well."
Emma could not doubt. It was a palpable display, repeated on every
possible occasion. When they had all talked a little while in harmony
of the weather and Mrs. Weston, she found herself abruptly addressed
with,
"Do not you think, Miss Woodhouse, our saucy little friend here is
charmingly recovered?--Do not you think her cure does Perry the highest
credit?--(here was a side-glance of great meaning at Jane.) Upon my
word, Perry has restored her in a wonderful short time!-- Oh! if you
had seen her, as I did, when she was at the worst!"-- And when Mrs.
Bates was saying something to Emma, whispered farther, "We do not say a
word of any _assistance_ that Perry might have; not a word of a certain
young physician from Windsor.--Oh! no; Perry shall have all the credit."
"I have scarce had the pleasure of seeing you, Miss Woodhouse," she
shortly afterwards began, "since the party to Box Hill. Very pleasant
party. But yet