from it, by the now encouraging manner of such a judge,
and such a friend as Miss Woodhouse, and only wanted invitation, to
give the history of her hopes with great, though trembling
delight.--Emma's tremblings as she asked, and as she listened, were
better concealed than Harriet's, but they were not less. Her voice was
not unsteady; but her mind was in all the perturbation that such a
development of self, such a burst of threatening evil, such a confusion
of sudden and perplexing emotions, must create.-- She listened with
much inward suffering, but with great outward patience, to Harriet's
detail.--Methodical, or well arranged, or very well delivered, it could
not be expected to be; but it contained, when separated from all the
feebleness and tautology of the narration, a substance to sink her
spirit--especially with the corroborating circumstances, which her own
memory brought in favour of Mr. Knightley's most improved opinion of
Harriet.
Harriet had been conscious of a difference in his behaviour ever since
those two decisive dances.--Emma knew that he had, on that occasion,
found her much superior to his expectation. From that evening, or at
least from the time of Miss Woodhouse's encouraging her to think of
him, Harriet had begun to be sensible of his talking to her much more
than he had been used to do, and of his having indeed quite a different
manner towards her; a manner of kindness and sweetness!--Latterly she
had been more and more aware of it. When they had been all walking
together, he had so often come and walked by her, and talked so very
delightfully!--He seemed to want to be acquainted with her. Emma knew
it to have been very much the case. She had often observed the change,
to almost the same extent.-- Harriet repeated expressions of
approbation and praise from him--and Emma felt them to be in the
closest agreement with what she had known of his opinion of Harriet.
He praised her for being without art or affectation, for having simple,
honest, generous, feelings.-- She knew that he saw such recommendations
in Harriet; he had dwelt on them to her more than once.--Much that
lived in Harriet's memory, many little particulars of the notice she
had received from him, a look, a speech, a removal from one chair to
another, a compliment implied, a preference inferred, had been
unnoticed, because unsuspected, by Emma. Circumstances that might
swell to half an hour's relation, and contained multiplied proofs to
her who had seen them, had passed undiscerned by her who now heard
them; but the two latest occurrences to be mentioned, the two of
strongest promise to Harriet, were not without some degree of witness
from Emma herself.--The first, was his walking with her apart from the
others, in the lime-walk at Donwell, where they had been walking some
time before Emma came, and he had taken pains (as she was convinced) to
draw her from the rest to himself--and at first, he had talked to her
in a more particular way than he had ever done before, in a very
particular way indeed!--(Harriet could not recall it without a blush.)
He seemed to be almost asking her, whether her affections were
engaged.-- But as soon as she (Miss Woodhouse) appeared likely to join
them, he changed the subject, and began talking about farming:-- The
second, was his having sat talking with her nearly half an hour before
Emma came back from her visit, the very last morning of his being at
Hartfield--though, when he first came in, he had said that he could not
stay five minutes--and his having told her, during their conversation,
that though he must go to London, it was very much against his
inclination that he left home at all, which was much more (as Emma
felt) than he had acknowledged to _her_. The superior degree of
confidence towards Harriet, which this one article marked, gave her
severe pain.
On the subject of the first of the two circumstances, she did, after a
little reflection, venture the following question. "Might he not?--Is
not it possible, that when enquiring, as you thought, into the state of
your affections, he might be alluding to Mr. Martin--he might have Mr.
Martin's interest in view? But Harriet rejected the suspicion with
spirit.
"Mr. Martin! No indeed!--There was not a hint of Mr. Martin. I hope I
know better now, than to care for Mr. Martin, or to be suspected of it."
When Harriet had closed her evidence, she appealed to her dear Miss
Woodhouse, to say whether she had not good ground for hope.
"I never should have presumed to think of it at first," said she, "but
for you. You told me to observe him carefully, and let his behaviour
be the rule of mine--and so I have. But now I seem to feel that I may
deserve him; and that if he does chuse me, it will not be any thing so
very wonderful."
The bitter feelings occasioned by this speech, the many bitter
feelings, made the utmost exertion necessary on Emma's side, to enable
her to say on reply,
"Harriet, I will only venture to declare, that Mr. Knightley is the
last man in the world, who would intentionally give any woman the idea
of his feeling for her more than he really does."
Harriet seemed ready to worship her friend for a sentence so
satisfactory; and Emma was only saved from raptures and fondness, which
at that moment would have been dreadful penance, by the sound of her
father's footsteps. He was coming through the hall. Harriet was too
much agitated to encounter him. "She could not compose herself-- Mr.
Woodhouse would be alarmed--she had better go;"--with most ready
encouragement from her friend, therefore, she passed off through
another door--and the moment she was gone, this was the spontaneous
burst of Emma's feelings: "Oh God! that I had never seen her!"
The rest of the day, the following night, were hardly enough for her
thoughts.--She was bewildered amidst the confusion of all that had
rushed on her within the last few hours. Every moment had brought a
fresh surprize; and every surprize must be matter of humiliation to
her.--How to understand it all! How to understand the deceptions she
had been thus practising on herself, and living under!--The blunders,
the blindness of her own head and heart!--she sat still, she walked
about, she tried her own room, she tried the shrubbery--in every place,
every posture, she perceived that she had acted most weakly; that she
had been