must reason herself into the power of
performance; and Emma could not but pity such feelings, whatever their
origin, and could not but resolve never to expose them to her neighbour
again.
At last Jane began, and though the first bars were feebly given, the
powers of the instrument were gradually done full justice to. Mrs.
Weston had been delighted before, and was delighted again; Emma joined
her in all her praise; and the pianoforte, with every proper
discrimination, was pronounced to be altogether of the highest promise.
"Whoever Colonel Campbell might employ," said Frank Churchill, with a
smile at Emma, "the person has not chosen ill. I heard a good deal of
Colonel Campbell's taste at Weymouth; and the softness of the upper
notes I am sure is exactly what he and _all_ _that_ _party_ would
particularly prize. I dare say, Miss Fairfax, that he either gave his
friend very minute directions, or wrote to Broadwood himself. Do not
you think so?"
Jane did not look round. She was not obliged to hear. Mrs. Weston had
been speaking to her at the same moment.
"It is not fair," said Emma, in a whisper; "mine was a random guess.
Do not distress her."
He shook his head with a smile, and looked as if he had very little
doubt and very little mercy. Soon afterwards he began again,
"How much your friends in Ireland must be enjoying your pleasure on
this occasion, Miss Fairfax. I dare say they often think of you, and
wonder which will be the day, the precise day of the instrument's
coming to hand. Do you imagine Colonel Campbell knows the business to
be going forward just at this time?--Do you imagine it to be the
consequence of an immediate commission from him, or that he may have
sent only a general direction, an order indefinite as to time, to
depend upon contingencies and conveniences?"
He paused. She could not but hear; she could not avoid answering,
"Till I have a letter from Colonel Campbell," said she, in a voice of
forced calmness, "I can imagine nothing with any confidence. It must
be all conjecture."
"Conjecture--aye, sometimes one conjectures right, and sometimes one
conjectures wrong. I wish I could conjecture how soon I shall make
this rivet quite firm. What nonsense one talks, Miss Woodhouse, when
hard at work, if one talks at all;--your real workmen, I suppose, hold
their tongues; but we gentlemen labourers if we get hold of a
word--Miss Fairfax said something about conjecturing. There, it is
done. I have the pleasure, madam, (to Mrs. Bates,) of restoring your
spectacles, healed for the present."
He was very warmly thanked both by mother and daughter; to escape a
little from the latter, he went to the pianoforte, and begged Miss
Fairfax, who was still sitting at it, to play something more.
"If you are very kind," said he, "it will be one of the waltzes we
danced last night;--let me live them over again. You did not enjoy
them as I did; you appeared tired the whole time. I believe you were
glad we danced no longer; but I would have given worlds--all the
worlds one ever has to give--for another half-hour."
She played.
"What felicity it is to hear a tune again which _has_ made one happy!--
If I mistake not that was danced at Weymouth."
She looked up at him for a moment, coloured deeply, and played
something else. He took some music from a chair near the pianoforte,
and turning to Emma, said,
"Here is something quite new to me. Do you know it?--Cramer.-- And
here are a new set of Irish melodies. That, from such a quarter, one
might expect. This was all sent with the instrument. Very thoughtful
of Colonel Campbell, was not it?--He knew Miss Fairfax could have no
music here. I honour that part of the attention particularly; it shews
it to have been so thoroughly from the heart. Nothing hastily done;
nothing incomplete. True affection only could have prompted it."
Emma wished he would be less pointed, yet could not help being amused;
and when on glancing her eye towards Jane Fairfax she caught the
remains of a smile, when she saw that with all the deep blush of
consciousness, there had been a smile of secret delight, she had less
scruple in the amusement, and much less compunction with respect to
her.--This amiable, upright, perfect Jane Fairfax was apparently
cherishing very reprehensible feelings.
He brought all the music to her, and they looked it over together.--
Emma took the opportunity of whispering,
"You speak too plain. She must understand you."
"I hope she does. I would have her understand me. I am not in the
least ashamed of my meaning."
"But really, I am half ashamed, and wish I had never taken up the idea."
"I am very glad you did, and that you communicated it to me. I have
now a key to all her odd looks and ways. Leave shame to her. If she
does wrong, she ought to feel it."
"She is not entirely without it, I think."
"I do not see much sign of it. She is playing _Robin_ _Adair_ at this
moment--_his_ favourite."
Shortly afterwards Miss Bates, passing near the window, descried Mr.
Knightley on horse-back not far off.
"Mr. Knightley I declare!--I must speak to him if possible, just to
thank him. I will not open the window here; it would give you all
cold; but I can go into my mother's room you know. I dare say he will
come in when he knows who is here. Quite delightful to have you all
meet so!--Our little room so honoured!"
She was in the adjoining chamber while she still spoke, and opening the
casement there, immediately called Mr. Knightley's attention, and every
syllable of their conversation was as distinctly heard by the others,
as if it had passed within the same apartment.
"How d' ye do?--how d'ye do?--Very well, I thank you. So obliged to
you for the carriage last night. We were just in time; my mother just
ready for us. Pray come in; do come in. You will find some friends
here."
So began Miss Bates; and Mr. Knightley seemed determined to be heard in
his turn, for most resolutely and commandingly did he say,
"How is your niece, Miss Bates?--I want to inquire after you all, but
particularly your niece. How is Miss Fairfax?--I hope she caught no
cold last night. How is she to-day? Tell me how Miss Fairfax is."
And Miss Bates was obliged to give