Somebody else believed _Mrs_. Gilbert
would have danced the other evening, if she had been asked. A word was
put in for a second young Cox; and at last, Mr. Weston naming one
family of cousins who must be included, and another of very old
acquaintance who could not be left out, it became a certainty that the
five couple would be at least ten, and a very interesting speculation
in what possible manner they could be disposed of.
The doors of the two rooms were just opposite each other. "Might not
they use both rooms, and dance across the passage?" It seemed the best
scheme; and yet it was not so good but that many of them wanted a
better. Emma said it would be awkward; Mrs. Weston was in distress
about the supper; and Mr. Woodhouse opposed it earnestly, on the score
of health. It made him so very unhappy, indeed, that it could not be
persevered in.
"Oh! no," said he; "it would be the extreme of imprudence. I could not
bear it for Emma!--Emma is not strong. She would catch a dreadful
cold. So would poor little Harriet. So you would all. Mrs. Weston,
you would be quite laid up; do not let them talk of such a wild thing.
Pray do not let them talk of it. That young man (speaking lower) is
very thoughtless. Do not tell his father, but that young man is not
quite the thing. He has been opening the doors very often this
evening, and keeping them open very inconsiderately. He does not think
of the draught. I do not mean to set you against him, but indeed he is
not quite the thing!"
Mrs. Weston was sorry for such a charge. She knew the importance of
it, and said every thing in her power to do it away. Every door was
now closed, the passage plan given up, and the first scheme of dancing
only in the room they were in resorted to again; and with such
good-will on Frank Churchill's part, that the space which a quarter of
an hour before had been deemed barely sufficient for five couple, was
now endeavoured to be made out quite enough for ten.
"We were too magnificent," said he. "We allowed unnecessary room. Ten
couple may stand here very well."
Emma demurred. "It would be a crowd--a sad crowd; and what could be
worse than dancing without space to turn in?"
"Very true," he gravely replied; "it was very bad." But still he went
on measuring, and still he ended with,
"I think there will be very tolerable room for ten couple."
"No, no," said she, "you are quite unreasonable. It would be dreadful
to be standing so close! Nothing can be farther from pleasure than to
be dancing in a crowd--and a crowd in a little room!"
"There is no denying it," he replied. "I agree with you exactly. A
crowd in a little room--Miss Woodhouse, you have the art of giving
pictures in a few words. Exquisite, quite exquisite!--Still, however,
having proceeded so far, one is unwilling to give the matter up. It
would be a disappointment to my father--and altogether--I do not know
that--I am rather of opinion that ten couple might stand here very
well."
Emma perceived that the nature of his gallantry was a little
self-willed, and that he would rather oppose than lose the pleasure of
dancing with her; but she took the compliment, and forgave the rest.
Had she intended ever to _marry_ him, it might have been worth while to
pause and consider, and try to understand the value of his preference,
and the character of his temper; but for all the purposes of their
acquaintance, he was quite amiable enough.
Before the middle of the next day, he was at Hartfield; and he entered
the room with such an agreeable smile as certified the continuance of
the scheme. It soon appeared that he came to announce an improvement.
"Well, Miss Woodhouse," he almost immediately began, "your inclination
for dancing has not been quite frightened away, I hope, by the terrors
of my father's little rooms. I bring a new proposal on the subject:--a
thought of my father's, which waits only your approbation to be acted
upon. May I hope for the honour of your hand for the two first dances
of this little projected ball, to be given, not at Randalls, but at the
Crown Inn?"
"The Crown!"
"Yes; if you and Mr. Woodhouse see no objection, and I trust you
cannot, my father hopes his friends will be so kind as to visit him
there. Better accommodations, he can promise them, and not a less
grateful welcome than at Randalls. It is his own idea. Mrs. Weston
sees no objection to it, provided you are satisfied. This is what we
all feel. Oh! you were perfectly right! Ten couple, in either of the
Randalls rooms, would have been insufferable!--Dreadful!--I felt how
right you were the whole time, but was too anxious for securing _any_
_thing_ to like to yield. Is not it a good exchange?--You consent--I
hope you consent?"
"It appears to me a plan that nobody can object to, if Mr. and Mrs.
Weston do not. I think it admirable; and, as far as I can answer for
myself, shall be most happy--It seems the only improvement that could
be. Papa, do you not think it an excellent improvement?"
She was obliged to repeat and explain it, before it was fully
comprehended; and then, being quite new, farther representations were
necessary to make it acceptable.
"No; he thought it very far from an improvement--a very bad plan--much
worse than the other. A room at an inn was always damp and dangerous;
never properly aired, or fit to be inhabited. If they must dance, they
had better dance at Randalls. He had never been in the room at the
Crown in his life--did not know the people who kept it by sight.--Oh!
no--a very bad plan. They would catch worse colds at the Crown than
anywhere."
"I was going to observe, sir," said Frank Churchill, "that one of the
great recommendations of this change would be the very little danger of
any body's catching cold--so much less danger at the Crown than at
Randalls! Mr. Perry might have reason to regret the alteration, but
nobody else could."
"Sir," said Mr. Woodhouse, rather warmly, "you are very much mistaken
if you suppose Mr. Perry to be that sort of character. Mr. Perry is
extremely concerned when any of us