wonder and amusement. And secretly she added to herself, "Lord
bless me! when should I ever have thought of putting by in cotton a
piece of court-plaister that Frank Churchill had been pulling about! I
never was equal to this."
"Here," resumed Harriet, turning to her box again, "here is something
still more valuable, I mean that _has_ _been_ more valuable, because
this is what did really once belong to him, which the court-plaister
never did."
Emma was quite eager to see this superior treasure. It was the end of
an old pencil,--the part without any lead.
"This was really his," said Harriet.--"Do not you remember one
morning?--no, I dare say you do not. But one morning--I forget exactly
the day--but perhaps it was the Tuesday or Wednesday before _that_
_evening_, he wanted to make a memorandum in his pocket-book; it was
about spruce-beer. Mr. Knightley had been telling him something about
brewing spruce-beer, and he wanted to put it down; but when he took out
his pencil, there was so little lead that he soon cut it all away, and
it would not do, so you lent him another, and this was left upon the
table as good for nothing. But I kept my eye on it; and, as soon as I
dared, caught it up, and never parted with it again from that moment."
"I do remember it," cried Emma; "I perfectly remember it.-- Talking
about spruce-beer.--Oh! yes--Mr. Knightley and I both saying we liked
it, and Mr. Elton's seeming resolved to learn to like it too. I
perfectly remember it.--Stop; Mr. Knightley was standing just here, was
not he? I have an idea he was standing just here."
"Ah! I do not know. I cannot recollect.--It is very odd, but I cannot
recollect.--Mr. Elton was sitting here, I remember, much about where I
am now."--
"Well, go on."
"Oh! that's all. I have nothing more to shew you, or to say--except
that I am now going to throw them both behind the fire, and I wish you
to see me do it."
"My poor dear Harriet! and have you actually found happiness in
treasuring up these things?"
"Yes, simpleton as I was!--but I am quite ashamed of it now, and wish I
could forget as easily as I can burn them. It was very wrong of me,
you know, to keep any remembrances, after he was married. I knew it
was--but had not resolution enough to part with them."
"But, Harriet, is it necessary to burn the court-plaister?--I have not
a word to say for the bit of old pencil, but the court-plaister might
be useful."
"I shall be happier to burn it," replied Harriet. "It has a
disagreeable look to me. I must get rid of every thing.-- There it
goes, and there is an end, thank Heaven! of Mr. Elton."
"And when," thought Emma, "will there be a beginning of Mr. Churchill?"
She had soon afterwards reason to believe that the beginning was
already made, and could not but hope that the gipsy, though she had
_told_ no fortune, might be proved to have made Harriet's.--About a
fortnight after the alarm, they came to a sufficient explanation, and
quite undesignedly. Emma was not thinking of it at the moment, which
made the information she received more valuable. She merely said, in
the course of some trivial chat, "Well, Harriet, whenever you marry I
would advise you to do so and so"--and thought no more of it, till
after a minute's silence she heard Harriet say in a very serious tone,
"I shall never marry."
Emma then looked up, and immediately saw how it was; and after a
moment's debate, as to whether it should pass unnoticed or not, replied,
"Never marry!--This is a new resolution."
"It is one that I shall never change, however."
After another short hesitation, "I hope it does not proceed from--I
hope it is not in compliment to Mr. Elton?"
"Mr. Elton indeed!" cried Harriet indignantly.--"Oh! no"--and Emma
could just catch the words, "so superior to Mr. Elton!"
She then took a longer time for consideration. Should she proceed no
farther?--should she let it pass, and seem to suspect nothing?--
Perhaps Harriet might think her cold or angry if she did; or perhaps if
she were totally silent, it might only drive Harriet into asking her to
hear too much; and against any thing like such an unreserve as had
been, such an open and frequent discussion of hopes and chances, she
was perfectly resolved.-- She believed it would be wiser for her to say
and know at once, all that she meant to say and know. Plain dealing
was always best. She had previously determined how far she would
proceed, on any application of the sort; and it would be safer for
both, to have the judicious law of her own brain laid down with
speed.-- She was decided, and thus spoke--
"Harriet, I will not affect to be in doubt of your meaning. Your
resolution, or rather your expectation of never marrying, results from
an idea that the person whom you might prefer, would be too greatly
your superior in situation to think of you. Is not it so?"
"Oh! Miss Woodhouse, believe me I have not the presumption to
suppose-- Indeed I am not so mad.--But it is a pleasure to me to admire
him at a distance--and to think of his infinite superiority to all the
rest of the world, with the gratitude, wonder, and veneration, which
are so proper, in me especially."
"I am not at all surprized at you, Harriet. The service he rendered
you was enough to warm your heart."
"Service! oh! it was such an inexpressible obligation!-- The very
recollection of it, and all that I felt at the time--when I saw him
coming--his noble look--and my wretchedness before. Such a change! In
one moment such a change! From perfect misery to perfect happiness!"
"It is very natural. It is natural, and it is honourable.-- Yes,
honourable, I think, to chuse so well and so gratefully.-- But that it
will be a fortunate preference is more that I can promise. I do not
advise you to give way to it, Harriet. I do not by any means engage
for its being returned. Consider what you are about. Perhaps it will
be wisest in you to check your feelings while you can: at any rate do
not let them carry you far, unless you are persuaded of his liking you.
Be observant of him. Let his behaviour be the guide of