Mrs. Elton, I am
obliged to any body who feels for me, but I am quite serious in wishing
nothing to be done till the summer. For two or three months longer I
shall remain where I am, and as I am."
"And I am quite serious too, I assure you," replied Mrs. Elton gaily,
"in resolving to be always on the watch, and employing my friends to
watch also, that nothing really unexceptionable may pass us."
In this style she ran on; never thoroughly stopped by any thing till
Mr. Woodhouse came into the room; her vanity had then a change of
object, and Emma heard her saying in the same half-whisper to Jane,
"Here comes this dear old beau of mine, I protest!--Only think of his
gallantry in coming away before the other men!--what a dear creature he
is;--I assure you I like him excessively. I admire all that quaint,
old-fashioned politeness; it is much more to my taste than modern ease;
modern ease often disgusts me. But this good old Mr. Woodhouse, I wish
you had heard his gallant speeches to me at dinner. Oh! I assure you
I began to think my caro sposo would be absolutely jealous. I fancy I
am rather a favourite; he took notice of my gown. How do you like
it?--Selina's choice--handsome, I think, but I do not know whether it
is not over-trimmed; I have the greatest dislike to the idea of being
over-trimmed--quite a horror of finery. I must put on a few ornaments
now, because it is expected of me. A bride, you know, must appear like
a bride, but my natural taste is all for simplicity; a simple style of
dress is so infinitely preferable to finery. But I am quite in the
minority, I believe; few people seem to value simplicity of
dress,--show and finery are every thing. I have some notion of putting
such a trimming as this to my white and silver poplin. Do you think it
will look well?"
The whole party were but just reassembled in the drawing-room when Mr.
Weston made his appearance among them. He had returned to a late
dinner, and walked to Hartfield as soon as it was over. He had been
too much expected by the best judges, for surprize--but there was
great joy. Mr. Woodhouse was almost as glad to see him now, as he
would have been sorry to see him before. John Knightley only was in
mute astonishment.--That a man who might have spent his evening quietly
at home after a day of business in London, should set off again, and
walk half a mile to another man's house, for the sake of being in mixed
company till bed-time, of finishing his day in the efforts of civility
and the noise of numbers, was a circumstance to strike him deeply. A
man who had been in motion since eight o'clock in the morning, and
might now have been still, who had been long talking, and might have
been silent, who had been in more than one crowd, and might have been
alone!--Such a man, to quit the tranquillity and independence of his
own fireside, and on the evening of a cold sleety April day rush out
again into the world!--Could he by a touch of his finger have instantly
taken back his wife, there would have been a motive; but his coming
would probably prolong rather than break up the party. John Knightley
looked at him with amazement, then shrugged his shoulders, and said, "I
could not have believed it even of _him_."
Mr. Weston meanwhile, perfectly unsuspicious of the indignation he was
exciting, happy and cheerful as usual, and with all the right of being
principal talker, which a day spent anywhere from home confers, was
making himself agreeable among the rest; and having satisfied the
inquiries of his wife as to his dinner, convincing her that none of all
her careful directions to the servants had been forgotten, and spread
abroad what public news he had heard, was proceeding to a family
communication, which, though principally addressed to Mrs. Weston, he
had not the smallest doubt of being highly interesting to every body in
the room. He gave her a letter, it was from Frank, and to herself; he
had met with it in his way, and had taken the liberty of opening it.
"Read it, read it," said he, "it will give you pleasure; only a few
lines--will not take you long; read it to Emma."
The two ladies looked over it together; and he sat smiling and talking
to them the whole time, in a voice a little subdued, but very audible
to every body.
"Well, he is coming, you see; good news, I think. Well, what do you
say to it?--I always told you he would be here again soon, did not
I?--Anne, my dear, did not I always tell you so, and you would not
believe me?--In town next week, you see--at the latest, I dare say; for
_she_ is as impatient as the black gentleman when any thing is to be
done; most likely they will be there to-morrow or Saturday. As to her
illness, all nothing of course. But it is an excellent thing to have
Frank among us again, so near as town. They will stay a good while
when they do come, and he will be half his time with us. This is
precisely what I wanted. Well, pretty good news, is not it? Have you
finished it? Has Emma read it all? Put it up, put it up; we will have
a good talk about it some other time, but it will not do now. I shall
only just mention the circumstance to the others in a common way."
Mrs. Weston was most comfortably pleased on the occasion. Her looks
and words had nothing to restrain them. She was happy, she knew she
was happy, and knew she ought to be happy. Her congratulations were
warm and open; but Emma could not speak so fluently. _She_ was a
little occupied in weighing her own feelings, and trying to understand
the degree of her agitation, which she rather thought was considerable.
Mr. Weston, however, too eager to be very observant, too communicative
to want others to talk, was very well satisfied with what she did say,
and soon moved away to make the rest of his friends happy by a partial
communication of what the whole room must have overheard already.
It