I think there was something wanting. Things did not
seem--that is, there seemed a little cloud upon the spirits of
some.--So it appeared to me at least, but I might be mistaken.
However, I think it answered so far as to tempt one to go again. What
say you both to our collecting the same party, and exploring to Box
Hill again, while the fine weather lasts?-- It must be the same party,
you know, quite the same party, not _one_ exception."
Soon after this Miss Bates came in, and Emma could not help being
diverted by the perplexity of her first answer to herself, resulting,
she supposed, from doubt of what might be said, and impatience to say
every thing.
"Thank you, dear Miss Woodhouse, you are all kindness.--It is
impossible to say--Yes, indeed, I quite understand--dearest Jane's
prospects--that is, I do not mean.--But she is charmingly recovered.--
How is Mr. Woodhouse?--I am so glad.--Quite out of my power.-- Such a
happy little circle as you find us here.--Yes, indeed.-- Charming young
man!--that is--so very friendly; I mean good Mr. Perry!--such
attention to Jane!"--And from her great, her more than commonly
thankful delight towards Mrs. Elton for being there, Emma guessed that
there had been a little show of resentment towards Jane, from the
vicarage quarter, which was now graciously overcome.-- After a few
whispers, indeed, which placed it beyond a guess, Mrs. Elton, speaking
louder, said,
"Yes, here I am, my good friend; and here I have been so long, that
anywhere else I should think it necessary to apologise; but, the truth
is, that I am waiting for my lord and master. He promised to join me
here, and pay his respects to you."
"What! are we to have the pleasure of a call from Mr. Elton?-- That
will be a favour indeed! for I know gentlemen do not like morning
visits, and Mr. Elton's time is so engaged."
"Upon my word it is, Miss Bates.--He really is engaged from morning to
night.--There is no end of people's coming to him, on some pretence or
other.--The magistrates, and overseers, and churchwardens, are always
wanting his opinion. They seem not able to do any thing without
him.--'Upon my word, Mr. E.,' I often say, 'rather you than I.-- I do
not know what would become of my crayons and my instrument, if I had
half so many applicants.'--Bad enough as it is, for I absolutely
neglect them both to an unpardonable degree.--I believe I have not
played a bar this fortnight.--However, he is coming, I assure you:
yes, indeed, on purpose to wait on you all." And putting up her hand
to screen her words from Emma--"A congratulatory visit, you know.--Oh!
yes, quite indispensable."
Miss Bates looked about her, so happily!--
"He promised to come to me as soon as he could disengage himself from
Knightley; but he and Knightley are shut up together in deep
consultation.--Mr. E. is Knightley's right hand."
Emma would not have smiled for the world, and only said, "Is Mr. Elton
gone on foot to Donwell?--He will have a hot walk."
"Oh! no, it is a meeting at the Crown, a regular meeting. Weston and
Cole will be there too; but one is apt to speak only of those who
lead.--I fancy Mr. E. and Knightley have every thing their own way."
"Have not you mistaken the day?" said Emma. "I am almost certain that
the meeting at the Crown is not till to-morrow.--Mr. Knightley was at
Hartfield yesterday, and spoke of it as for Saturday."
"Oh! no, the meeting is certainly to-day," was the abrupt answer, which
denoted the impossibility of any blunder on Mrs. Elton's side.-- "I do
believe," she continued, "this is the most troublesome parish that ever
was. We never heard of such things at Maple Grove."
"Your parish there was small," said Jane.
"Upon my word, my dear, I do not know, for I never heard the subject
talked of."
"But it is proved by the smallness of the school, which I have heard
you speak of, as under the patronage of your sister and Mrs. Bragge;
the only school, and not more than five-and-twenty children."
"Ah! you clever creature, that's very true. What a thinking brain you
have! I say, Jane, what a perfect character you and I should make, if
we could be shaken together. My liveliness and your solidity would
produce perfection.--Not that I presume to insinuate, however, that
_some_ people may not think _you_ perfection already.--But hush!--not
a word, if you please."
It seemed an unnecessary caution; Jane was wanting to give her words,
not to Mrs. Elton, but to Miss Woodhouse, as the latter plainly saw.
The wish of distinguishing her, as far as civility permitted, was very
evident, though it could not often proceed beyond a look.
Mr. Elton made his appearance. His lady greeted him with some of her
sparkling vivacity.
"Very pretty, sir, upon my word; to send me on here, to be an
encumbrance to my friends, so long before you vouchsafe to come!-- But
you knew what a dutiful creature you had to deal with. You knew I
should not stir till my lord and master appeared.-- Here have I been
sitting this hour, giving these young ladies a sample of true conjugal
obedience--for who can say, you know, how soon it may be wanted?"
Mr. Elton was so hot and tired, that all this wit seemed thrown away.
His civilities to the other ladies must be paid; but his subsequent
object was to lament over himself for the heat he was suffering, and
the walk he had had for nothing.
"When I got to Donwell," said he, "Knightley could not be found. Very
odd! very unaccountable! after the note I sent him this morning, and
the message he returned, that he should certainly be at home till one."
"Donwell!" cried his wife.--"My dear Mr. E., you have not been to
Donwell!--You mean the Crown; you come from the meeting at the Crown."
"No, no, that's to-morrow; and I particularly wanted to see Knightley
to-day on that very account.--Such a dreadful broiling morning!-- I
went over the fields too--(speaking in a tone of great ill-usage,)
which made it so much the worse. And then not to find him at home! I
assure you I am not at all pleased. And no apology left, no message
for me. The housekeeper declared she knew nothing of my being
expected.-- Very extraordinary!--And nobody knew at all which way he
was gone. Perhaps to Hartfield, perhaps to the Abbey Mill,