shawl--for the evenings are not warm--her large new shawl-- Mrs.
Dixon's wedding-present.--So kind of her to think of my mother! Bought
at Weymouth, you know--Mr. Dixon's choice. There were three others,
Jane says, which they hesitated about some time. Colonel Campbell
rather preferred an olive. My dear Jane, are you sure you did not wet
your feet?--It was but a drop or two, but I am so afraid:--but Mr.
Frank Churchill was so extremely--and there was a mat to step upon--I
shall never forget his extreme politeness.--Oh! Mr. Frank Churchill, I
must tell you my mother's spectacles have never been in fault since;
the rivet never came out again. My mother often talks of your
good-nature. Does not she, Jane?--Do not we often talk of Mr. Frank
Churchill?-- Ah! here's Miss Woodhouse.--Dear Miss Woodhouse, how do
you do?-- Very well I thank you, quite well. This is meeting quite in
fairy-land!-- Such a transformation!--Must not compliment, I know
(eyeing Emma most complacently)--that would be rude--but upon my word,
Miss Woodhouse, you do look--how do you like Jane's hair?--You are a
judge.-- She did it all herself. Quite wonderful how she does her
hair!-- No hairdresser from London I think could.--Ah! Dr. Hughes I
declare--and Mrs. Hughes. Must go and speak to Dr. and Mrs. Hughes
for a moment.--How do you do? How do you do?--Very well, I thank you.
This is delightful, is not it?--Where's dear Mr. Richard?-- Oh! there
he is. Don't disturb him. Much better employed talking to the young
ladies. How do you do, Mr. Richard?--I saw you the other day as you
rode through the town--Mrs. Otway, I protest!--and good Mr. Otway, and
Miss Otway and Miss Caroline.--Such a host of friends!--and Mr. George
and Mr. Arthur!--How do you do? How do you all do?--Quite well, I am
much obliged to you. Never better.-- Don't I hear another
carriage?--Who can this be?--very likely the worthy Coles.--Upon my
word, this is charming to be standing about among such friends! And
such a noble fire!--I am quite roasted. No coffee, I thank you, for
me--never take coffee.--A little tea if you please, sir, by and
bye,--no hurry--Oh! here it comes. Every thing so good!"
Frank Churchill returned to his station by Emma; and as soon as Miss
Bates was quiet, she found herself necessarily overhearing the
discourse of Mrs. Elton and Miss Fairfax, who were standing a little
way behind her.--He was thoughtful. Whether he were overhearing too,
she could not determine. After a good many compliments to Jane on her
dress and look, compliments very quietly and properly taken, Mrs. Elton
was evidently wanting to be complimented herself--and it was, "How do
you like my gown?--How do you like my trimming?-- How has Wright done
my hair?"--with many other relative questions, all answered with
patient politeness. Mrs. Elton then said, "Nobody can think less of
dress in general than I do--but upon such an occasion as this, when
every body's eyes are so much upon me, and in compliment to the
Westons--who I have no doubt are giving this ball chiefly to do me
honour--I would not wish to be inferior to others. And I see very few
pearls in the room except mine.-- So Frank Churchill is a capital
dancer, I understand.--We shall see if our styles suit.--A fine young
man certainly is Frank Churchill. I like him very well."
At this moment Frank began talking so vigorously, that Emma could not
but imagine he had overheard his own praises, and did not want to hear
more;--and the voices of the ladies were drowned for a while, till
another suspension brought Mrs. Elton's tones again distinctly
forward.--Mr. Elton had just joined them, and his wife was exclaiming,
"Oh! you have found us out at last, have you, in our seclusion?-- I was
this moment telling Jane, I thought you would begin to be impatient for
tidings of us."
"Jane!"--repeated Frank Churchill, with a look of surprize and
displeasure.-- "That is easy--but Miss Fairfax does not disapprove it,
I suppose."
"How do you like Mrs. Elton?" said Emma in a whisper.
"Not at all."
"You are ungrateful."
"Ungrateful!--What do you mean?" Then changing from a frown to a
smile--"No, do not tell me--I do not want to know what you mean.--
Where is my father?--When are we to begin dancing?"
Emma could hardly understand him; he seemed in an odd humour. He
walked off to find his father, but was quickly back again with both Mr.
and Mrs. Weston. He had met with them in a little perplexity, which
must be laid before Emma. It had just occurred to Mrs. Weston that
Mrs. Elton must be asked to begin the ball; that she would expect it;
which interfered with all their wishes of giving Emma that
distinction.--Emma heard the sad truth with fortitude.
"And what are we to do for a proper partner for her?" said Mr. Weston.
"She will think Frank ought to ask her."
Frank turned instantly to Emma, to claim her former promise; and
boasted himself an engaged man, which his father looked his most
perfect approbation of--and it then appeared that Mrs. Weston was
wanting _him_ to dance with Mrs. Elton himself, and that their business
was to help to persuade him into it, which was done pretty soon.-- Mr.
Weston and Mrs. Elton led the way, Mr. Frank Churchill and Miss
Woodhouse followed. Emma must submit to stand second to Mrs. Elton,
though she had always considered the ball as peculiarly for her. It
was almost enough to make her think of marrying. Mrs. Elton had
undoubtedly the advantage, at this time, in vanity completely
gratified; for though she had intended to begin with Frank Churchill,
she could not lose by the change. Mr. Weston might be his son's
superior.-- In spite of this little rub, however, Emma was smiling with
enjoyment, delighted to see the respectable length of the set as it was
forming, and to feel that she had so many hours of unusual festivity
before her.-- She was more disturbed by Mr. Knightley's not dancing
than by any thing else.--There he was, among the standers-by, where he
ought not to be; he ought to be dancing,--not classing himself with the
husbands, and fathers, and whist-players, who were pretending to feel
an interest in the dance till their rubbers were made up,--so young as
he looked!-- He could not have appeared to greater advantage perhaps
anywhere, than where he had placed himself. His tall, firm, upright
figure, among the bulky forms and stooping shoulders of the elderly
men,