was such as Emma felt must draw every body's eyes; and, excepting
her own partner, there was not one among the whole row of young men who
could be compared with him.--He moved a few steps nearer, and those few
steps were enough to prove in how gentlemanlike a manner, with what
natural grace, he must have danced, would he but take the
trouble.--Whenever she caught his eye, she forced him to smile; but in
general he was looking grave. She wished he could love a ballroom
better, and could like Frank Churchill better.-- He seemed often
observing her. She must not flatter herself that he thought of her
dancing, but if he were criticising her behaviour, she did not feel
afraid. There was nothing like flirtation between her and her partner.
They seemed more like cheerful, easy friends, than lovers. That Frank
Churchill thought less of her than he had done, was indubitable.
The ball proceeded pleasantly. The anxious cares, the incessant
attentions of Mrs. Weston, were not thrown away. Every body seemed
happy; and the praise of being a delightful ball, which is seldom
bestowed till after a ball has ceased to be, was repeatedly given in
the very beginning of the existence of this. Of very important, very
recordable events, it was not more productive than such meetings
usually are. There was one, however, which Emma thought something
of.--The two last dances before supper were begun, and Harriet had no
partner;--the only young lady sitting down;--and so equal had been
hitherto the number of dancers, that how there could be any one
disengaged was the wonder!--But Emma's wonder lessened soon afterwards,
on seeing Mr. Elton sauntering about. He would not ask Harriet to
dance if it were possible to be avoided: she was sure he would not--and
she was expecting him every moment to escape into the card-room.
Escape, however, was not his plan. He came to the part of the room
where the sitters-by were collected, spoke to some, and walked about in
front of them, as if to shew his liberty, and his resolution of
maintaining it. He did not omit being sometimes directly before Miss
Smith, or speaking to those who were close to her.-- Emma saw it. She
was not yet dancing; she was working her way up from the bottom, and
had therefore leisure to look around, and by only turning her head a
little she saw it all. When she was half-way up the set, the whole
group were exactly behind her, and she would no longer allow her eyes
to watch; but Mr. Elton was so near, that she heard every syllable of a
dialogue which just then took place between him and Mrs. Weston; and
she perceived that his wife, who was standing immediately above her,
was not only listening also, but even encouraging him by significant
glances.--The kind-hearted, gentle Mrs. Weston had left her seat to
join him and say, "Do not you dance, Mr. Elton?" to which his prompt
reply was, "Most readily, Mrs. Weston, if you will dance with me."
"Me!--oh! no--I would get you a better partner than myself. I am no
dancer."
"If Mrs. Gilbert wishes to dance," said he, "I shall have great
pleasure, I am sure--for, though beginning to feel myself rather an old
married man, and that my dancing days are over, it would give me very
great pleasure at any time to stand up with an old friend like Mrs.
Gilbert."
"Mrs. Gilbert does not mean to dance, but there is a young lady
disengaged whom I should be very glad to see dancing--Miss Smith."
"Miss Smith!--oh!--I had not observed.--You are extremely obliging--
and if I were not an old married man.--But my dancing days are over,
Mrs. Weston. You will excuse me. Any thing else I should be most
happy to do, at your command--but my dancing days are over."
Mrs. Weston said no more; and Emma could imagine with what surprize and
mortification she must be returning to her seat. This was Mr. Elton!
the amiable, obliging, gentle Mr. Elton.-- She looked round for a
moment; he had joined Mr. Knightley at a little distance, and was
arranging himself for settled conversation, while smiles of high glee
passed between him and his wife.
She would not look again. Her heart was in a glow, and she feared her
face might be as hot.
In another moment a happier sight caught her;--Mr. Knightley leading
Harriet to the set!--Never had she been more surprized, seldom more
delighted, than at that instant. She was all pleasure and gratitude,
both for Harriet and herself, and longed to be thanking him; and though
too distant for speech, her countenance said much, as soon as she could
catch his eye again.
His dancing proved to be just what she had believed it, extremely good;
and Harriet would have seemed almost too lucky, if it had not been for
the cruel state of things before, and for the very complete enjoyment
and very high sense of the distinction which her happy features
announced. It was not thrown away on her, she bounded higher than
ever, flew farther down the middle, and was in a continual course of
smiles.
Mr. Elton had retreated into the card-room, looking (Emma trusted) very
foolish. She did not think he was quite so hardened as his wife,
though growing very like her;--_she_ spoke some of her feelings, by
observing audibly to her partner,
"Knightley has taken pity on poor little Miss Smith!--Very goodnatured,
I declare."
Supper was announced. The move began; and Miss Bates might be heard
from that moment, without interruption, till her being seated at table
and taking up her spoon.
"Jane, Jane, my dear Jane, where are you?--Here is your tippet. Mrs.
Weston begs you to put on your tippet. She says she is afraid there
will be draughts in the passage, though every thing has been done--One
door nailed up--Quantities of matting--My dear Jane, indeed you must.
Mr. Churchill, oh! you are too obliging! How well you put it on!--so
gratified! Excellent dancing indeed!-- Yes, my dear, I ran home, as I
said I should, to help grandmama to bed, and got back again, and nobody
missed me.--I set off without saying a word, just as I told you.
Grandmama was quite well, had a charming evening with Mr. Woodhouse, a
vast deal of chat, and backgammon.--Tea was made downstairs, biscuits
and baked apples and wine before she came away: amazing luck in some
of her throws: and she inquired a great deal