imposed on by others in a most mortifying degree; that she had
been imposing on herself in a degree yet more mortifying; that she was
wretched, and should probably find this day but the beginning of
wretchedness.
To understand, thoroughly understand her own heart, was the first
endeavour. To that point went every leisure moment which her father's
claims on her allowed, and every moment of involuntary absence of mind.
How long had Mr. Knightley been so dear to her, as every feeling
declared him now to be? When had his influence, such influence
begun?-- When had he succeeded to that place in her affection, which
Frank Churchill had once, for a short period, occupied?--She looked
back; she compared the two--compared them, as they had always stood in
her estimation, from the time of the latter's becoming known to her--
and as they must at any time have been compared by her, had it--oh!
had it, by any blessed felicity, occurred to her, to institute the
comparison.--She saw that there never had been a time when she did not
consider Mr. Knightley as infinitely the superior, or when his regard
for her had not been infinitely the most dear. She saw, that in
persuading herself, in fancying, in acting to the contrary, she had
been entirely under a delusion, totally ignorant of her own heart--and,
in short, that she had never really cared for Frank Churchill at all!
This was the conclusion of the first series of reflection. This was
the knowledge of herself, on the first question of inquiry, which she
reached; and without being long in reaching it.-- She was most
sorrowfully indignant; ashamed of every sensation but the one revealed
to her--her affection for Mr. Knightley.-- Every other part of her mind
was disgusting.
With insufferable vanity had she believed herself in the secret of
every body's feelings; with unpardonable arrogance proposed to arrange
every body's destiny. She was proved to have been universally
mistaken; and she had not quite done nothing--for she had done
mischief. She had brought evil on Harriet, on herself, and she too
much feared, on Mr. Knightley.--Were this most unequal of all
connexions to take place, on her must rest all the reproach of having
given it a beginning; for his attachment, she must believe to be
produced only by a consciousness of Harriet's;--and even were this not
the case, he would never have known Harriet at all but for her folly.
Mr. Knightley and Harriet Smith!--It was a union to distance every
wonder of the kind.--The attachment of Frank Churchill and Jane Fairfax
became commonplace, threadbare, stale in the comparison, exciting no
surprize, presenting no disparity, affording nothing to be said or
thought.--Mr. Knightley and Harriet Smith!--Such an elevation on her
side! Such a debasement on his! It was horrible to Emma to think how
it must sink him in the general opinion, to foresee the smiles, the
sneers, the merriment it would prompt at his expense; the mortification
and disdain of his brother, the thousand inconveniences to
himself.--Could it be?--No; it was impossible. And yet it was far,
very far, from impossible.--Was it a new circumstance for a man of
first-rate abilities to be captivated by very inferior powers? Was it
new for one, perhaps too busy to seek, to be the prize of a girl who
would seek him?--Was it new for any thing in this world to be unequal,
inconsistent, incongruous--or for chance and circumstance (as second
causes) to direct the human fate?
Oh! had she never brought Harriet forward! Had she left her where she
ought, and where he had told her she ought!--Had she not, with a folly
which no tongue could express, prevented her marrying the
unexceptionable young man who would have made her happy and respectable
in the line of life to which she ought to belong--all would have been
safe; none of this dreadful sequel would have been.
How Harriet could ever have had the presumption to raise her thoughts
to Mr. Knightley!--How she could dare to fancy herself the chosen of
such a man till actually assured of it!-- But Harriet was less humble,
had fewer scruples than formerly.-- Her inferiority, whether of mind or
situation, seemed little felt.-- She had seemed more sensible of Mr.
Elton's being to stoop in marrying her, than she now seemed of Mr.
Knightley's.-- Alas! was not that her own doing too? Who had been at
pains to give Harriet notions of self-consequence but herself?--Who but
herself had taught her, that she was to elevate herself if possible,
and that her claims were great to a high worldly establishment?-- If
Harriet, from being humble, were grown vain, it was her doing too.
CHAPTER XII
Till now that she was threatened with its loss, Emma had never known
how much of her happiness depended on being _first_ with Mr. Knightley,
first in interest and affection.--Satisfied that it was so, and feeling
it her due, she had enjoyed it without reflection; and only in the
dread of being supplanted, found how inexpressibly important it had
been.--Long, very long, she felt she had been first; for, having no
female connexions of his own, there had been only Isabella whose claims
could be compared with hers, and she had always known exactly how far
he loved and esteemed Isabella. She had herself been first with him
for many years past. She had not deserved it; she had often been
negligent or perverse, slighting his advice, or even wilfully opposing
him, insensible of half his merits, and quarrelling with him because he
would not acknowledge her false and insolent estimate of her own--but
still, from family attachment and habit, and thorough excellence of
mind, he had loved her, and watched over her from a girl, with an
endeavour to improve her, and an anxiety for her doing right, which no
other creature had at all shared. In spite of all her faults, she knew
she was dear to him; might she not say, very dear?-- When the
suggestions of hope, however, which must follow here, presented
themselves, she could not presume to indulge them. Harriet Smith might
think herself not unworthy of being peculiarly, exclusively,
passionately loved by Mr. Knightley. _She_ could not. She could not
flatter herself with any idea of blindness in his attachment to _her_.
She had received a very recent proof of its impartiality.-- How shocked
had he been by her behaviour to Miss Bates! How directly, how strongly
had he expressed himself to her on the subject!--Not too strongly for
the offence--but far,