did, and
seemed ready to shake hands, if I would. She did not do any of it in
the same way that she used; I could see she was altered; but, however,
she seemed to _try_ to be very friendly, and we shook hands, and stood
talking some time; but I know no more what I said--I was in such a
tremble!--I remember she said she was sorry we never met now; which I
thought almost too kind! Dear, Miss Woodhouse, I was absolutely
miserable! By that time, it was beginning to hold up, and I was
determined that nothing should stop me from getting away--and
then--only think!-- I found he was coming up towards me too--slowly you
know, and as if he did not quite know what to do; and so he came and
spoke, and I answered--and I stood for a minute, feeling dreadfully,
you know, one can't tell how; and then I took courage, and said it did
not rain, and I must go; and so off I set; and I had not got three
yards from the door, when he came after me, only to say, if I was going
to Hartfield, he thought I had much better go round by Mr. Cole's
stables, for I should find the near way quite floated by this rain.
Oh! dear, I thought it would have been the death of me! So I said, I
was very much obliged to him: you know I could not do less; and then
he went back to Elizabeth, and I came round by the stables--I believe I
did--but I hardly knew where I was, or any thing about it. Oh! Miss
Woodhouse, I would rather done any thing than have it happen: and yet,
you know, there was a sort of satisfaction in seeing him behave so
pleasantly and so kindly. And Elizabeth, too. Oh! Miss Woodhouse, do
talk to me and make me comfortable again."
Very sincerely did Emma wish to do so; but it was not immediately in
her power. She was obliged to stop and think. She was not thoroughly
comfortable herself. The young man's conduct, and his sister's, seemed
the result of real feeling, and she could not but pity them. As
Harriet described it, there had been an interesting mixture of wounded
affection and genuine delicacy in their behaviour. But she had
believed them to be well-meaning, worthy people before; and what
difference did this make in the evils of the connexion? It was folly
to be disturbed by it. Of course, he must be sorry to lose her--they
must be all sorry. Ambition, as well as love, had probably been
mortified. They might all have hoped to rise by Harriet's
acquaintance: and besides, what was the value of Harriet's
description?--So easily pleased--so little discerning;--what signified
her praise?
She exerted herself, and did try to make her comfortable, by
considering all that had passed as a mere trifle, and quite unworthy of
being dwelt on,
"It might be distressing, for the moment," said she; "but you seem to
have behaved extremely well; and it is over--and may never--can never,
as a first meeting, occur again, and therefore you need not think about
it."
Harriet said, "very true," and she "would not think about it;" but
still she talked of it--still she could talk of nothing else; and Emma,
at last, in order to put the Martins out of her head, was obliged to
hurry on the news, which she had meant to give with so much tender
caution; hardly knowing herself whether to rejoice or be angry, ashamed
or only amused, at such a state of mind in poor Harriet--such a
conclusion of Mr. Elton's importance with her!
Mr. Elton's rights, however, gradually revived. Though she did not
feel the first intelligence as she might have done the day before, or
an hour before, its interest soon increased; and before their first
conversation was over, she had talked herself into all the sensations
of curiosity, wonder and regret, pain and pleasure, as to this
fortunate Miss Hawkins, which could conduce to place the Martins under
proper subordination in her fancy.
Emma learned to be rather glad that there had been such a meeting. It
had been serviceable in deadening the first shock, without retaining
any influence to alarm. As Harriet now lived, the Martins could not
get at her, without seeking her, where hitherto they had wanted either
the courage or the condescension to seek her; for since her refusal of
the brother, the sisters never had been at Mrs. Goddard's; and a
twelvemonth might pass without their being thrown together again, with
any necessity, or even any power of speech.
CHAPTER IV
Human nature is so well disposed towards those who are in interesting
situations, that a young person, who either marries or dies, is sure of
being kindly spoken of.
A week had not passed since Miss Hawkins's name was first mentioned in
Highbury, before she was, by some means or other, discovered to have
every recommendation of person and mind; to be handsome, elegant,
highly accomplished, and perfectly amiable: and when Mr. Elton himself
arrived to triumph in his happy prospects, and circulate the fame of
her merits, there was very little more for him to do, than to tell her
Christian name, and say whose music she principally played.
Mr. Elton returned, a very happy man. He had gone away rejected and
mortified--disappointed in a very sanguine hope, after a series of what
appeared to him strong encouragement; and not only losing the right
lady, but finding himself debased to the level of a very wrong one. He
had gone away deeply offended--he came back engaged to another--and to
another as superior, of course, to the first, as under such
circumstances what is gained always is to what is lost. He came back
gay and self-satisfied, eager and busy, caring nothing for Miss
Woodhouse, and defying Miss Smith.
The charming Augusta Hawkins, in addition to all the usual advantages
of perfect beauty and merit, was in possession of an independent
fortune, of so many thousands as would always be called ten; a point of
some dignity, as well as some convenience: the story told well; he had
not thrown himself away--he had gained a woman of 10,000 l. or
thereabouts; and he had gained her with such delightful rapidity--the
first hour of introduction had been so very soon followed by
distinguishing notice; the history which he had to give Mrs. Cole of
the rise and progress of the affair