with
such indifference."
He proceeded a little farther, reading to himself; and then, with a
smile, observed, "Humph! a fine complimentary opening: But it is his
way. One man's style must not be the rule of another's. We will not
be severe."
"It will be natural for me," he added shortly afterwards, "to speak my
opinion aloud as I read. By doing it, I shall feel that I am near you.
It will not be so great a loss of time: but if you dislike it--"
"Not at all. I should wish it."
Mr. Knightley returned to his reading with greater alacrity.
"He trifles here," said he, "as to the temptation. He knows he is
wrong, and has nothing rational to urge.--Bad.--He ought not to have
formed the engagement.--'His father's disposition:'--he is unjust,
however, to his father. Mr. Weston's sanguine temper was a blessing on
all his upright and honourable exertions; but Mr. Weston earned every
present comfort before he endeavoured to gain it.--Very true; he did
not come till Miss Fairfax was here."
"And I have not forgotten," said Emma, "how sure you were that he might
have come sooner if he would. You pass it over very handsomely--but
you were perfectly right."
"I was not quite impartial in my judgment, Emma:--but yet, I think--
had _you_ not been in the case--I should still have distrusted him."
When he came to Miss Woodhouse, he was obliged to read the whole of it
aloud--all that related to her, with a smile; a look; a shake of the
head; a word or two of assent, or disapprobation; or merely of love, as
the subject required; concluding, however, seriously, and, after steady
reflection, thus--
"Very bad--though it might have been worse.--Playing a most dangerous
game. Too much indebted to the event for his acquittal.-- No judge of
his own manners by you.--Always deceived in fact by his own wishes, and
regardless of little besides his own convenience.-- Fancying you to
have fathomed his secret. Natural enough!--his own mind full of
intrigue, that he should suspect it in others.--Mystery; Finesse--how
they pervert the understanding! My Emma, does not every thing serve to
prove more and more the beauty of truth and sincerity in all our
dealings with each other?"
Emma agreed to it, and with a blush of sensibility on Harriet's
account, which she could not give any sincere explanation of.
"You had better go on," said she.
He did so, but very soon stopt again to say, "the pianoforte! Ah!
That was the act of a very, very young man, one too young to consider
whether the inconvenience of it might not very much exceed the
pleasure. A boyish scheme, indeed!--I cannot comprehend a man's
wishing to give a woman any proof of affection which he knows she would
rather dispense with; and he did know that she would have prevented the
instrument's coming if she could."
After this, he made some progress without any pause. Frank Churchill's
confession of having behaved shamefully was the first thing to call for
more than a word in passing.
"I perfectly agree with you, sir,"--was then his remark. "You did
behave very shamefully. You never wrote a truer line." And having gone
through what immediately followed of the basis of their disagreement,
and his persisting to act in direct opposition to Jane Fairfax's sense
of right, he made a fuller pause to say, "This is very bad.--He had
induced her to place herself, for his sake, in a situation of extreme
difficulty and uneasiness, and it should have been his first object to
prevent her from suffering unnecessarily.--She must have had much more
to contend with, in carrying on the correspondence, than he could. He
should have respected even unreasonable scruples, had there been such;
but hers were all reasonable. We must look to her one fault, and
remember that she had done a wrong thing in consenting to the
engagement, to bear that she should have been in such a state of
punishment."
Emma knew that he was now getting to the Box Hill party, and grew
uncomfortable. Her own behaviour had been so very improper! She was
deeply ashamed, and a little afraid of his next look. It was all read,
however, steadily, attentively, and without the smallest remark; and,
excepting one momentary glance at her, instantly withdrawn, in the fear
of giving pain--no remembrance of Box Hill seemed to exist.
"There is no saying much for the delicacy of our good friends, the
Eltons," was his next observation.--"His feelings are natural.-- What!
actually resolve to break with him entirely!--She felt the engagement
to be a source of repentance and misery to each--she dissolved
it.--What a view this gives of her sense of his behaviour!--Well, he
must be a most extraordinary--"
"Nay, nay, read on.--You will find how very much he suffers."
"I hope he does," replied Mr. Knightley coolly, and resuming the
letter. "'Smallridge!'--What does this mean? What is all this?"
"She had engaged to go as governess to Mrs. Smallridge's children--a
dear friend of Mrs. Elton's--a neighbour of Maple Grove; and, by the
bye, I wonder how Mrs. Elton bears the disappointment?"
"Say nothing, my dear Emma, while you oblige me to read--not even of
Mrs. Elton. Only one page more. I shall soon have done. What a
letter the man writes!"
"I wish you would read it with a kinder spirit towards him."
"Well, there _is_ feeling here.--He does seem to have suffered in
finding her ill.--Certainly, I can have no doubt of his being fond of
her. 'Dearer, much dearer than ever.' I hope he may long continue to
feel all the value of such a reconciliation.--He is a very liberal
thanker, with his thousands and tens of thousands.--'Happier than I
deserve.' Come, he knows himself there. 'Miss Woodhouse calls me the
child of good fortune.'--Those were Miss Woodhouse's words, were
they?-- And a fine ending--and there is the letter. The child of good
fortune! That was your name for him, was it?"
"You do not appear so well satisfied with his letter as I am; but still
you must, at least I hope you must, think the better of him for it. I
hope it does him some service with you."
"Yes, certainly it does. He has had great faults, faults of
inconsideration and thoughtlessness; and I am very much of his opinion
in thinking him likely to be happier than he deserves: but still as he
is, beyond a doubt, really attached to Miss Fairfax, and will soon, it
may be hoped, have the advantage of being constantly with