to do,
that their advice for her going was most prompt and successful.
She owned that, considering every thing, she was not absolutely without
inclination for the party. The Coles expressed themselves so
properly--there was so much real attention in the manner of it--so
much consideration for her father. "They would have solicited the
honour earlier, but had been waiting the arrival of a folding-screen
from London, which they hoped might keep Mr. Woodhouse from any draught
of air, and therefore induce him the more readily to give them the
honour of his company." Upon the whole, she was very persuadable; and
it being briefly settled among themselves how it might be done without
neglecting his comfort--how certainly Mrs. Goddard, if not Mrs. Bates,
might be depended on for bearing him company-- Mr. Woodhouse was to be
talked into an acquiescence of his daughter's going out to dinner on a
day now near at hand, and spending the whole evening away from him. As
for _his_ going, Emma did not wish him to think it possible, the hours
would be too late, and the party too numerous. He was soon pretty well
resigned.
"I am not fond of dinner-visiting," said he--"I never was. No more is
Emma. Late hours do not agree with us. I am sorry Mr. and Mrs. Cole
should have done it. I think it would be much better if they would
come in one afternoon next summer, and take their tea with us--take us
in their afternoon walk; which they might do, as our hours are so
reasonable, and yet get home without being out in the damp of the
evening. The dews of a summer evening are what I would not expose any
body to. However, as they are so very desirous to have dear Emma dine
with them, and as you will both be there, and Mr. Knightley too, to
take care of her, I cannot wish to prevent it, provided the weather be
what it ought, neither damp, nor cold, nor windy." Then turning to
Mrs. Weston, with a look of gentle reproach--"Ah! Miss Taylor, if you
had not married, you would have staid at home with me."
"Well, sir," cried Mr. Weston, "as I took Miss Taylor away, it is
incumbent on me to supply her place, if I can; and I will step to Mrs.
Goddard in a moment, if you wish it."
But the idea of any thing to be done in a _moment_, was increasing, not
lessening, Mr. Woodhouse's agitation. The ladies knew better how to
allay it. Mr. Weston must be quiet, and every thing deliberately
arranged.
With this treatment, Mr. Woodhouse was soon composed enough for talking
as usual. "He should be happy to see Mrs. Goddard. He had a great
regard for Mrs. Goddard; and Emma should write a line, and invite her.
James could take the note. But first of all, there must be an answer
written to Mrs. Cole."
"You will make my excuses, my dear, as civilly as possible. You will
say that I am quite an invalid, and go no where, and therefore must
decline their obliging invitation; beginning with my _compliments_, of
course. But you will do every thing right. I need not tell you what
is to be done. We must remember to let James know that the carriage
will be wanted on Tuesday. I shall have no fears for you with him. We
have never been there above once since the new approach was made; but
still I have no doubt that James will take you very safely. And when
you get there, you must tell him at what time you would have him come
for you again; and you had better name an early hour. You will not
like staying late. You will get very tired when tea is over."
"But you would not wish me to come away before I am tired, papa?"
"Oh! no, my love; but you will soon be tired. There will be a great
many people talking at once. You will not like the noise."
"But, my dear sir," cried Mr. Weston, "if Emma comes away early, it
will be breaking up the party."
"And no great harm if it does," said Mr. Woodhouse. "The sooner every
party breaks up, the better."
"But you do not consider how it may appear to the Coles. Emma's going
away directly after tea might be giving offence. They are good-natured
people, and think little of their own claims; but still they must feel
that any body's hurrying away is no great compliment; and Miss
Woodhouse's doing it would be more thought of than any other person's
in the room. You would not wish to disappoint and mortify the Coles, I
am sure, sir; friendly, good sort of people as ever lived, and who have
been your neighbours these _ten_ years."
"No, upon no account in the world, Mr. Weston; I am much obliged to you
for reminding me. I should be extremely sorry to be giving them any
pain. I know what worthy people they are. Perry tells me that Mr.
Cole never touches malt liquor. You would not think it to look at him,
but he is bilious--Mr. Cole is very bilious. No, I would not be the
means of giving them any pain. My dear Emma, we must consider this. I
am sure, rather than run the risk of hurting Mr. and Mrs. Cole, you
would stay a little longer than you might wish. You will not regard
being tired. You will be perfectly safe, you know, among your friends."
"Oh yes, papa. I have no fears at all for myself; and I should have no
scruples of staying as late as Mrs. Weston, but on your account. I am
only afraid of your sitting up for me. I am not afraid of your not
being exceedingly comfortable with Mrs. Goddard. She loves piquet, you
know; but when she is gone home, I am afraid you will be sitting up by
yourself, instead of going to bed at your usual time--and the idea of
that would entirely destroy my comfort. You must promise me not to sit
up."
He did, on the condition of some promises on her side: such as that,
if she came home cold, she would be sure to warm herself thoroughly; if
hungry, that she would take something to eat; that her own maid should
sit up for her; and that Serle and the butler should see that every
thing