more retirement
at home than he liked. His importance at Enscombe was very evident.
He did not boast, but it naturally betrayed itself, that he had
persuaded his aunt where his uncle could do nothing, and on her
laughing and noticing it, he owned that he believed (excepting one or
two points) he could _with_ _time_ persuade her to any thing. One of
those points on which his influence failed, he then mentioned. He had
wanted very much to go abroad--had been very eager indeed to be allowed
to travel--but she would not hear of it. This had happened the year
before. _Now_, he said, he was beginning to have no longer the same
wish.
The unpersuadable point, which he did not mention, Emma guessed to be
good behaviour to his father.
"I have made a most wretched discovery," said he, after a short
pause.-- "I have been here a week to-morrow--half my time. I never
knew days fly so fast. A week to-morrow!--And I have hardly begun to
enjoy myself. But just got acquainted with Mrs. Weston, and others!--
I hate the recollection."
"Perhaps you may now begin to regret that you spent one whole day, out
of so few, in having your hair cut."
"No," said he, smiling, "that is no subject of regret at all. I have
no pleasure in seeing my friends, unless I can believe myself fit to be
seen."
The rest of the gentlemen being now in the room, Emma found herself
obliged to turn from him for a few minutes, and listen to Mr. Cole.
When Mr. Cole had moved away, and her attention could be restored as
before, she saw Frank Churchill looking intently across the room at
Miss Fairfax, who was sitting exactly opposite.
"What is the matter?" said she.
He started. "Thank you for rousing me," he replied. "I believe I have
been very rude; but really Miss Fairfax has done her hair in so odd a
way--so very odd a way--that I cannot keep my eyes from her. I never
saw any thing so outree!--Those curls!--This must be a fancy of her
own. I see nobody else looking like her!-- I must go and ask her
whether it is an Irish fashion. Shall I?-- Yes, I will--I declare I
will--and you shall see how she takes it;--whether she colours."
He was gone immediately; and Emma soon saw him standing before Miss
Fairfax, and talking to her; but as to its effect on the young lady, as
he had improvidently placed himself exactly between them, exactly in
front of Miss Fairfax, she could absolutely distinguish nothing.
Before he could return to his chair, it was taken by Mrs. Weston.
"This is the luxury of a large party," said she:--"one can get near
every body, and say every thing. My dear Emma, I am longing to talk to
you. I have been making discoveries and forming plans, just like
yourself, and I must tell them while the idea is fresh. Do you know
how Miss Bates and her niece came here?"
"How?--They were invited, were not they?"
"Oh! yes--but how they were conveyed hither?--the manner of their
coming?"
"They walked, I conclude. How else could they come?"
"Very true.--Well, a little while ago it occurred to me how very sad it
would be to have Jane Fairfax walking home again, late at night, and
cold as the nights are now. And as I looked at her, though I never saw
her appear to more advantage, it struck me that she was heated, and
would therefore be particularly liable to take cold. Poor girl! I
could not bear the idea of it; so, as soon as Mr. Weston came into the
room, and I could get at him, I spoke to him about the carriage. You
may guess how readily he came into my wishes; and having his
approbation, I made my way directly to Miss Bates, to assure her that
the carriage would be at her service before it took us home; for I
thought it would be making her comfortable at once. Good soul! she was
as grateful as possible, you may be sure. 'Nobody was ever so
fortunate as herself!'--but with many, many thanks--'there was no
occasion to trouble us, for Mr. Knightley's carriage had brought, and
was to take them home again.' I was quite surprized;--very glad, I am
sure; but really quite surprized. Such a very kind attention--and so
thoughtful an attention!--the sort of thing that so few men would
think of. And, in short, from knowing his usual ways, I am very much
inclined to think that it was for their accommodation the carriage was
used at all. I do suspect he would not have had a pair of horses for
himself, and that it was only as an excuse for assisting them."
"Very likely," said Emma--"nothing more likely. I know no man more
likely than Mr. Knightley to do the sort of thing--to do any thing
really good-natured, useful, considerate, or benevolent. He is not a
gallant man, but he is a very humane one; and this, considering Jane
Fairfax's ill-health, would appear a case of humanity to him;--and for
an act of unostentatious kindness, there is nobody whom I would fix on
more than on Mr. Knightley. I know he had horses to-day--for we
arrived together; and I laughed at him about it, but he said not a word
that could betray."
"Well," said Mrs. Weston, smiling, "you give him credit for more
simple, disinterested benevolence in this instance than I do; for while
Miss Bates was speaking, a suspicion darted into my head, and I have
never been able to get it out again. The more I think of it, the more
probable it appears. In short, I have made a match between Mr.
Knightley and Jane Fairfax. See the consequence of keeping you
company!--What do you say to it?"
"Mr. Knightley and Jane Fairfax!" exclaimed Emma. "Dear Mrs. Weston,
how could you think of such a thing?--Mr. Knightley!--Mr. Knightley
must not marry!--You would not have little Henry cut out from
Donwell?-- Oh! no, no, Henry must have Donwell. I cannot at all
consent to Mr. Knightley's marrying; and I am sure it is not at all
likely. I am amazed that you should think of such a thing."
"My dear Emma, I have told you what led me to think of it. I do not
want the match--I do not want to injure dear little Henry--but the
idea has been given me by circumstances; and if Mr.