'My friend Knightley' had been so often
mentioned, that I was really impatient to see him; and I must do my
caro sposo the justice to say that he need not be ashamed of his
friend. Knightley is quite the gentleman. I like him very much.
Decidedly, I think, a very gentleman-like man."
Happily, it was now time to be gone. They were off; and Emma could
breathe.
"Insufferable woman!" was her immediate exclamation. "Worse than I had
supposed. Absolutely insufferable! Knightley!--I could not have
believed it. Knightley!--never seen him in her life before, and call
him Knightley!--and discover that he is a gentleman! A little upstart,
vulgar being, with her Mr. E., and her _caro_ _sposo_, and her
resources, and all her airs of pert pretension and underbred finery.
Actually to discover that Mr. Knightley is a gentleman! I doubt
whether he will return the compliment, and discover her to be a lady.
I could not have believed it! And to propose that she and I should
unite to form a musical club! One would fancy we were bosom friends!
And Mrs. Weston!-- Astonished that the person who had brought me up
should be a gentlewoman! Worse and worse. I never met with her equal.
Much beyond my hopes. Harriet is disgraced by any comparison. Oh!
what would Frank Churchill say to her, if he were here? How angry and
how diverted he would be! Ah! there I am--thinking of him directly.
Always the first person to be thought of! How I catch myself out!
Frank Churchill comes as regularly into my mind!"--
All this ran so glibly through her thoughts, that by the time her
father had arranged himself, after the bustle of the Eltons' departure,
and was ready to speak, she was very tolerably capable of attending.
"Well, my dear," he deliberately began, "considering we never saw her
before, she seems a very pretty sort of young lady; and I dare say she
was very much pleased with you. She speaks a little too quick. A
little quickness of voice there is which rather hurts the ear. But I
believe I am nice; I do not like strange voices; and nobody speaks like
you and poor Miss Taylor. However, she seems a very obliging,
pretty-behaved young lady, and no doubt will make him a very good wife.
Though I think he had better not have married. I made the best excuses
I could for not having been able to wait on him and Mrs. Elton on this
happy occasion; I said that I hoped I _should_ in the course of the
summer. But I ought to have gone before. Not to wait upon a bride is
very remiss. Ah! it shews what a sad invalid I am! But I do not like
the corner into Vicarage Lane."
"I dare say your apologies were accepted, sir. Mr. Elton knows you."
"Yes: but a young lady--a bride--I ought to have paid my respects to
her if possible. It was being very deficient."
"But, my dear papa, you are no friend to matrimony; and therefore why
should you be so anxious to pay your respects to a _bride_? It ought
to be no recommendation to _you_. It is encouraging people to marry if
you make so much of them."
"No, my dear, I never encouraged any body to marry, but I would always
wish to pay every proper attention to a lady--and a bride, especially,
is never to be neglected. More is avowedly due to _her_. A bride, you
know, my dear, is always the first in company, let the others be who
they may."
"Well, papa, if this is not encouragement to marry, I do not know what
is. And I should never have expected you to be lending your sanction
to such vanity-baits for poor young ladies."
"My dear, you do not understand me. This is a matter of mere common
politeness and good-breeding, and has nothing to do with any
encouragement to people to marry."
Emma had done. Her father was growing nervous, and could not
understand _her_. Her mind returned to Mrs. Elton's offences, and
long, very long, did they occupy her.
CHAPTER XV
Emma was not required, by any subsequent discovery, to retract her ill
opinion of Mrs. Elton. Her observation had been pretty correct. Such
as Mrs. Elton appeared to her on this second interview, such she
appeared whenever they met again,--self-important, presuming, familiar,
ignorant, and ill-bred. She had a little beauty and a little
accomplishment, but so little judgment that she thought herself coming
with superior knowledge of the world, to enliven and improve a country
neighbourhood; and conceived Miss Hawkins to have held such a place in
society as Mrs. Elton's consequence only could surpass.
There was no reason to suppose Mr. Elton thought at all differently
from his wife. He seemed not merely happy with her, but proud. He had
the air of congratulating himself on having brought such a woman to
Highbury, as not even Miss Woodhouse could equal; and the greater part
of her new acquaintance, disposed to commend, or not in the habit of
judging, following the lead of Miss Bates's good-will, or taking it for
granted that the bride must be as clever and as agreeable as she
professed herself, were very well satisfied; so that Mrs. Elton's
praise passed from one mouth to another as it ought to do, unimpeded by
Miss Woodhouse, who readily continued her first contribution and talked
with a good grace of her being "very pleasant and very elegantly
dressed."
In one respect Mrs. Elton grew even worse than she had appeared at
first. Her feelings altered towards Emma.--Offended, probably, by the
little encouragement which her proposals of intimacy met with, she drew
back in her turn and gradually became much more cold and distant; and
though the effect was agreeable, the ill-will which produced it was
necessarily increasing Emma's dislike. Her manners, too--and Mr.
Elton's, were unpleasant towards Harriet. They were sneering and
negligent. Emma hoped it must rapidly work Harriet's cure; but the
sensations which could prompt such behaviour sunk them both very
much.--It was not to be doubted that poor Harriet's attachment had been
an offering to conjugal unreserve, and her own share in the story,
under a colouring the least favourable to her and the most soothing to
him, had in all likelihood been given also. She was, of course, the
object of their joint dislike.-- When they had nothing else to say, it
must be always easy to begin abusing Miss Woodhouse; and the