to remain thus alone in
darkness, showed that my nerves were regaining a healthy tone: I
thought of the nun, but hardly feared her; though the staircase was
behind me, leading up, through blind, black night, from landing to
landing, to the haunted grenier. Yet I own my heart quaked, my pulse
leaped, when I suddenly heard breathing and rustling, and turning, saw
in the deep shadow of the steps a deeper shadow still--a shape that
moved and descended. It paused a while at the classe-door, and then it
glided before me. Simultaneously came a clangor of the distant door-
bell. Life-like sounds bring life-like feelings: this shape was too
round and low for my gaunt nun: it was only Madame Beck on duty.
"Mademoiselle Lucy!" cried Rosine, bursting in, lamp in hand, from the
corridor, "on est la pour vous au salon."
Madame saw me, I saw Madame, Rosine saw us both: there was no mutual
recognition. I made straight for the salon. There I found what I own I
anticipated I should find--Dr. Bretton; but he was in evening-dress.
"The carriage is at the door," said he; "my mother has sent it to take
you to the theatre; she was going herself, but an arrival has
prevented her: she immediately said, 'Take Lucy in my place.' Will you
go?"
"Just now? I am not dressed," cried I, glancing despairingly at my
dark merino.
"You have half an hour to dress. I should have given you notice, but I
only determined on going since five o'clock, when I heard there was to
be a genuine regale in the presence of a great actress."
And he mentioned a name that thrilled me--a name that, in those days,
could thrill Europe. It is hushed now: its once restless echoes are
all still; she who bore it went years ago to her rest: night and
oblivion long since closed above her; but _then_ her day--a day
of Sirius--stood at its full height, light and fervour.
"I'll go; I will be ready in ten minutes," I vowed. And away I flew,
never once checked, reader, by the thought which perhaps at this
moment checks you: namely, that to go anywhere with Graham and without
Mrs. Bretton could be objectionable. I could not have conceived, much
less have expressed to Graham, such thought--such scruple--without
risk of exciting a tyrannous self-contempt: of kindling an inward fire
of shame so quenchless, and so devouring, that I think it would soon
have licked up the very life in my veins. Besides, my godmother,
knowing her son, and knowing me, would as soon have thought of
chaperoning a sister with a brother, as of keeping anxious guard over
our incomings and outgoings.
The present was no occasion for showy array; my dun mist crape would
suffice, and I sought the same in the great oak-wardrobe in the
dormitory, where hung no less than forty dresses. But there had been
changes and reforms, and some innovating hand had pruned this same
crowded wardrobe, and carried divers garments to the grenier--my crape
amongst the rest. I must fetch it. I got the key, and went aloft
fearless, almost thoughtless. I unlocked the door, I plunged in. The
reader may believe it or not, but when I thus suddenly entered, that
garret was not wholly dark as it should have been: from one point
there shone a solemn light, like a star, but broader. So plainly it
shone, that it revealed the deep alcove with a portion of the
tarnished scarlet curtain drawn over it. Instantly, silently, before
my eyes, it vanished; so did the curtain and alcove: all that end of
the garret became black as night. I ventured no research; I had not
time nor will; snatching my dress, which hung on the wall, happily
near the door, I rushed out, relocked the door with convulsed haste,
and darted downwards to the dormitory.
But I trembled too much to dress myself: impossible to arrange hair or
fasten hooks-and-eyes with such fingers, so I called Rosine and bribed
her to help me. Rosine liked a bribe, so she did her best, smoothed
and plaited my hair as well as a coiffeur would have done, placed the
lace collar mathematically straight, tied the neck-ribbon accurately--
in short, did her work like the neat-handed Phillis she could be when
she those. Having given me my handkerchief and gloves, she took the
candle and lighted me down-stairs. After all, I had forgotten my
shawl; she ran back to fetch it; and I stood with Dr. John in the
vestibule, waiting.
"What is this, Lucy?" said he, looking down at me narrowly. "Here is
the old excitement. Ha! the nun again?"
But I utterly denied the charge: I was vexed to be suspected of a
second illusion. He was sceptical.
"She has been, as sure as I live," said he; "her figure crossing your
eyes leaves on them a peculiar gleam and expression not to be
mistaken."
"She has _not_ been," I persisted: for, indeed, I could deny her
apparition with truth.
"The old symptoms are there," he affirmed: "a particular pale, and
what the Scotch call a 'raised' look."
He was so obstinate, I thought it better to tell him what I really
_had_ seen. Of course with him it was held to be another effect
of the same cause: it was all optical illusion--nervous malady, and so
on. Not one bit did I believe him; but I dared not contradict: doctors
are so self-opinionated, so immovable in their dry, materialist views.
Rosine brought the shawl, and I was bundled into the carriage.
* * * * *
The theatre was full--crammed to its roof: royal and noble were there:
palace and hotel had emptied their inmates into those tiers so
thronged and so hushed. Deeply did I feel myself privileged in having
a place before that stage; I longed to see a being of whose powers I
had heard reports which made me conceive peculiar anticipations. I
wondered if she would justify her renown: with strange curiosity, with
feelings severe and austere, yet of riveted interest, I waited. She
was a study of such nature as had not encountered my eyes yet: a great
and new planet she was: but in what shape? I waited her rising.
She rose at nine that December night: above the horizon I saw her
come. She could shine yet with pale grandeur and steady might; but
that star verged already on its judgment-day. Seen near, it was a
chaos--hollow, half-consumed: an orb perished or