English school approve this custom?
The dressing of her hair puzzled me; she had plenty of it: auburn,
unmixed with grey: though she was forty years old. Seeing my
embarrassment, she said, "You have not been a femme-de-chambre in your
own country?" And taking the brush from my hand, and setting me aside,
not ungently or disrespectfully, she arranged it herself. In
performing other offices of the toilet, she half-directed, half-aided
me, without the least display of temper or impatience. N.B.--That was
the first and last time I was required to dress her. Henceforth, on
Rosine, the portress, devolved that duty.
When attired, Madame Beck appeared a personage of a figure rather
short and stout, yet still graceful in its own peculiar way; that is,
with the grace resulting from proportion of parts. Her complexion was
fresh and sanguine, not too rubicund; her eye, blue and serene; her
dark silk dress fitted her as a French sempstress alone can make a
dress fit; she looked well, though a little bourgeoise; as bourgeoise,
indeed, she was. I know not what of harmony pervaded her whole person;
and yet her face offered contrast, too: its features were by no means
such as are usually seen in conjunction with a complexion of such
blended freshness and repose: their outline was stern: her forehead
was high but narrow; it expressed capacity and some benevolence, but
no expanse; nor did her peaceful yet watchful eye ever know the fire
which is kindled in the heart or the softness which flows thence. Her
mouth was hard: it could be a little grim; her lips were thin. For
sensibility and genius, with all their tenderness and temerity, I felt
somehow that Madame would be the right sort of Minos in petticoats.
In the long run, I found she was something else in petticoats too. Her
name was Modeste Maria Beck, nee Kint: it ought to have been Ignacia.
She was a charitable woman, and did a great deal of good. There never
was a mistress whose rule was milder. I was told that she never once
remonstrated with the intolerable Mrs. Sweeny, despite her tipsiness,
disorder, and general neglect; yet Mrs. Sweeny had to go the moment
her departure became convenient. I was told, too, that neither masters
nor teachers were found fault with in that establishment; yet both
masters and teachers were often changed: they vanished and others
filled their places, none could well explain how.
The establishment was both a pensionnat and an externat: the externes
or day-pupils exceeded one hundred in number; the boarders were about
a score. Madame must have possessed high administrative powers: she
ruled all these, together with four teachers, eight masters, six
servants, and three children, managing at the same time to perfection
the pupils' parents and friends; and that without apparent effort;
without bustle, fatigue, fever, or any symptom of undue, excitement:
occupied she always was--busy, rarely. It is true that Madame had her
own system for managing and regulating this mass of machinery; and a
very pretty system it was: the reader has seen a specimen of it, in
that small affair of turning my pocket inside out, and reading my
private memoranda. "Surveillance," "espionage,"--these were her
watchwords.
Still, Madame knew what honesty was, and liked it--that is, when it
did not obtrude its clumsy scruples in the way of her will and
interest. She had a respect for "Angleterre;" and as to "les
Anglaises," she would have the women of no other country about her own
children, if she could help it.
Often in the evening, after she had been plotting and counter-
plotting, spying and receiving the reports of spies all day, she would
come up to my room--a trace of real weariness on her brow--and she
would sit down and listen while the children said their little prayers
to me in English: the Lord's Prayer, and the hymn beginning "Gentle
Jesus," these little Catholics were permitted to repeat at my knee;
and, when I had put them to bed, she would talk to me (I soon gained
enough French to be able to understand, and even answer her) about
England and Englishwomen, and the reasons for what she was pleased to
term their superior intelligence, and more real and reliable probity.
Very good sense she often showed; very sound opinions she often
broached: she seemed to know that keeping girls in distrustful
restraint, in blind ignorance, and under a surveillance that left them
no moment and no corner for retirement, was not the best way to make
them grow up honest and modest women; but she averred that ruinous
consequences would ensue if any other method were tried with
continental children: they were so accustomed to restraint, that
relaxation, however guarded, would be misunderstood and fatally
presumed on. She was sick, she would declare, of the means she had to
use, but use them she must; and after discoursing, often with dignity
and delicacy, to me, she would move away on her "souliers de silence,"
and glide ghost-like through the house, watching and spying
everywhere, peering through every keyhole, listening behind every
door.
After all, Madame's system was not bad--let me do her justice. Nothing
could be better than all her arrangements for the physical well-being
of her scholars. No minds were overtasked: the lessons were well
distributed and made incomparably easy to the learner; there was a
liberty of amusement, and a provision for exercise which kept the
girls healthy; the food was abundant and good: neither pale nor puny
faces were anywhere to be seen in the Rue Fossette. She never grudged
a holiday; she allowed plenty of time for sleeping, dressing, washing,
eating; her method in all these matters was easy, liberal, salutary,
and rational: many an austere English school-mistress would do vastly
well to imitate her--and I believe many would be glad to do so, if
exacting English parents would let them.
As Madame Beck ruled by espionage, she of course had her staff of
spies: she perfectly knew the quality of the tools she used, and while
she would not scruple to handle the dirtiest for a dirty occasion--
flinging this sort from her like refuse rind, after the orange has
been duly squeezed--I have known her fastidious in seeking pure metal
for clean uses; and when once a bloodless and rustless instrument was
found, she was careful of the prize, keeping it in silk and cotton-
wool. Yet, woe be to that man or woman who relied on her one inch
beyond the point where it was