struggling to form in my memory, since the first moment I heard
his voice, started up perfected. This was the very gentleman to whom I
had spoken at the bureau; who had helped me in the matter of the
trunk; who had been my guide through the dark, wet park. Listening, as
he passed down the long vestibule out into the street, I recognised
his very tread: it was the same firm and equal stride I had followed
under the dripping trees.
* * * * *
It was, to be concluded that this young surgeon-physician's first
visit to the Rue Fossette would be the last. The respectable Dr.
Pillule being expected home the next day, there appeared no reason why
his temporary substitute should again represent him; but the Fates had
written their decree to the contrary.
Dr. Pillule had been summoned to see a rich old hypochondriac at the
antique university town of Bouquin-Moisi, and upon his prescribing
change of air and travel as remedies, he was retained to accompany the
timid patient on a tour of some weeks; it but remained, therefore, for
the new doctor to continue his attendance at the Rue Fossette.
I often saw him when he came; for Madame would not trust the little
invalid to Trinette, but required me to spend much of my time in the
nursery. I think he was skilful. Fifine recovered rapidly under his
care, yet even her convalescence did not hasten his dismissal. Destiny
and Madame Beck seemed in league, and both had ruled that he should
make deliberate acquaintance with the vestibule, the private staircase
and upper chambers of the Rue Fossette.
No sooner did Fifine emerge from his hands than Desiree declared
herself ill. That possessed child had a genius for simulation, and
captivated by the attentions and indulgences of a sick-room, she came
to the conclusion that an illness would perfectly accommodate her
tastes, and took her bed accordingly. She acted well, and her mother
still better; for while the whole case was transparent to Madame Beck
as the day, she treated it with an astonishingly well-assured air of
gravity and good faith.
What surprised me was, that Dr. John (so the young Englishman had
taught Fifine to call him, and we all took from her the habit of
addressing him by this name, till it became an established custom, and
he was known by no other in the Rue Fossette)--that Dr. John consented
tacitly to adopt Madame's tactics, and to fall in with her manoeuvres.
He betrayed, indeed, a period of comic doubt, cast one or two rapid
glances from the child to the mother, indulged in an interval of self-
consultation, but finally resigned himself with a good grace to play
his part in the farce. Desiree eat like a raven, gambolled day and
night in her bed, pitched tents with the sheets and blankets, lounged
like a Turk amidst pillows and bolsters, diverted herself with
throwing her shoes at her bonne and grimacing at her sisters--over-
flowed, in short, with unmerited health and evil spirits; only
languishing when her mamma and the physician paid their diurnal visit.
Madame Beck, I knew, was glad, at any price, to have her daughter in
bed out of the way of mischief; but I wondered that Dr. John did not
tire of the business.
Every day, on this mere pretext of a motive, he gave punctual
attendance; Madame always received him with the same empressement, the
same sunshine for himself, the same admirably counterfeited air of
concern for her child. Dr. John wrote harmless prescriptions for the
patient, and viewed her mother with a shrewdly sparkling eye. Madame
caught his rallying looks without resenting them--she had too much
good sense for that. Supple as the young doctor seemed, one could not
despise him--this pliant part was evidently not adopted in the design
to curry favour with his employer: while he liked his office at the
pensionnat, and lingered strangely about the Rue Fossette, he was
independent, almost careless in his carriage there; and yet, too, he
was often thoughtful and preoccupied.
It was not perhaps my business to observe the mystery of his bearing,
or search out its origin or aim; but, placed as I was, I could hardly
help it. He laid himself open to my observation, according to my
presence in the room just that degree of notice and consequence a
person of my exterior habitually expects: that is to say, about what
is given to unobtrusive articles of furniture, chairs of ordinary
joiner's work, and carpets of no striking pattern. Often, while
waiting for Madame, he would muse, smile, watch, or listen like a man
who thinks himself alone. I, meantime, was free to puzzle over his
countenance and movements, and wonder what could be the meaning of
that peculiar interest and attachment--all mixed up with doubt and
strangeness, and inexplicably ruled by some presiding spell--which
wedded him to this demi-convent, secluded in the built-up core of a
capital. He, I believe, never remembered that I had eyes in my head,
much less a brain behind them.
Nor would he ever have found this out, but that one day, while he sat
in the sunshine and I was observing the colouring of his hair,
whiskers, and complexion--the whole being of such a tone as a strong
light brings out with somewhat perilous force (indeed I recollect I
was driven to compare his beamy head in my thoughts to that of the
"golden image" which Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up), an idea new,
sudden, and startling, riveted my attention with an over-mastering
strength and power of attraction. I know not to this day how I looked
at him: the force of surprise, and also of conviction, made me forget
myself; and I only recovered wonted consciousness when I saw that his
notice was arrested, and that it had caught my movement in a clear
little oval mirror fixed in the side of the window recess--by the aid
of which reflector Madame often secretly spied persons walking in the
garden below. Though of so gay and sanguine a temperament, he was not
without a certain nervous sensitiveness which made him ill at ease
under a direct, inquiring gaze. On surprising me thus, he turned and
said, in a tone which, though courteous, had just so much dryness in
it as to mark a shade of annoyance, as well as to give to what was
said the character of rebuke, "Mademoiselle does not spare me: I am
not vain enough