crowd?
I was asking this question when an open carriage passed me filled with
known faces. Through the deep throng it could pass but slowly; the
spirited horses fretted in their curbed ardour. I saw the occupants of
that carriage well: me they could not see, or, at least, not know,
folded close in my large shawl, screened with my straw hat (in that
motley crowd no dress was noticeably strange). I saw the Count de
Bassompierre; I saw my godmother, handsomely apparelled, comely and
cheerful; I saw, too, Paulina Mary, compassed with the triple halo of
her beauty, her youth, and her happiness. In looking on her
countenance of joy, and eyes of festal light, one scarce remembered to
note the gala elegance of what she wore; I know only that the drapery
floating about her was all white and light and bridal; seated opposite
to her I saw Graham Bretton; it was in looking up at him her aspect
had caught its lustre--the light repeated in _her_ eyes beamed
first out of his.
It gave me strange pleasure to follow these friends viewlessly, and I
_did_ follow them, as I thought, to the park. I watched them
alight (carriages were inadmissible) amidst new and unanticipated
splendours. Lo! the iron gateway, between the stone columns, was
spanned by a flaming arch built of massed stars; and, following them
cautiously beneath that arch, where were they, and where was I?
In a land of enchantment, a garden most gorgeous, a plain sprinkled
with coloured meteors, a forest with sparks of purple and ruby and
golden fire gemming the foliage; a region, not of trees and shadow,
but of strangest architectural wealth--of altar and of temple, of
pyramid, obelisk, and sphinx: incredible to say, the wonders and the
symbols of Egypt teemed throughout the park of Villette.
No matter that in five minutes the secret was mine--the key of the
mystery picked up, and its illusion unveiled--no matter that I quickly
recognised the material of these solemn fragments--the timber, the
paint, and the pasteboard--these inevitable discoveries failed to
quite destroy the charm, or undermine the marvel of that night. No
matter that I now seized the explanation of the whole great fete--a
fete of which the conventual Rue Fossette had not tasted, though it
had opened at dawn that morning, and was still in full vigour near
midnight.
In past days there had been, said history, an awful crisis in the fate
of Labassecour, involving I know not what peril to the rights and
liberties of her gallant citizens. Rumours of wars there had been, if
not wars themselves; a kind of struggling in the streets--a bustle--a
running to and fro, some rearing of barricades, some burgher-rioting,
some calling out of troops, much interchange of brickbats, and even a
little of shot. Tradition held that patriots had fallen: in the old
Basse-Ville was shown an enclosure, solemnly built in and set apart,
holding, it was said, the sacred bones of martyrs. Be this as it may,
a certain day in the year was still kept as a festival in honour of
the said patriots and martyrs of somewhat apocryphal memory--the
morning being given to a solemn Te Deum in St. Jean Baptiste, the
evening devoted to spectacles, decorations, and illuminations, such as
these I now saw.
While looking up at the image of a white ibis, fixed on a column--
while fathoming the deep, torch-lit perspective of an avenue, at the
close of which was couched a sphinx--I lost sight of the party which,
from the middle of the great square, I had followed--or, rather, they
vanished like a group of apparitions. On this whole scene was
impressed a dream-like character: every shape was wavering, every
movement floating, every voice echo-like--half-mocking, half-
uncertain. Paulina and her friends being gone, I scarce could avouch
that I had really seen them; nor did I miss them as guides through the
chaos, far less regret them as protectors amidst the night.
That festal night would have been safe for a very child. Half the
peasantry had come in from the outlying environs of Villette, and the
decent burghers were all abroad and around, dressed in their best. My
straw-hat passed amidst cap and jacket, short petticoat, and long
calico mantle, without, perhaps, attracting a glance; I only took the
precaution to bind down the broad leaf gipsy-wise, with a
supplementary ribbon--and then I felt safe as if masked.
Safe I passed down the avenues--safe I mixed with the crowd where it
was deepest. To be still was not in my power, nor quietly to observe.
I took a revel of the scene; I drank the elastic night-air--the swell
of sound, the dubious light, now flashing, now fading. As to Happiness
or Hope, they and I had shaken hands, but just now--I scorned Despair.
My vague aim, as I went, was to find the stone-basin, with its clear
depth and green lining: of that coolness and verdure I thought, with
the passionate thirst of unconscious fever. Amidst the glare, and
hurry, and throng, and noise, I still secretly and chiefly longed to
come on that circular mirror of crystal, and surprise the moon
glassing therein her pearly front.
I knew my route, yet it seemed as if I was hindered from pursuing it
direct: now a sight, and now a sound, called me aside, luring me down
this alley and down that. Already I saw the thick-planted trees which
framed this tremulous and rippled glass, when, choiring out of a glade
to the right, broke such a sound as I thought might be heard if Heaven
were to open--such a sound, perhaps, as _was_ heard above the
plain of Bethlehem, on the night of glad tidings.
The song, the sweet music, rose afar, but rushing swiftly on fast-
strengthening pinions--there swept through these shades so full a
storm of harmonies that, had no tree been near against which to lean,
I think I must have dropped. Voices were there, it seemed to me,
unnumbered; instruments varied and countless--bugle, horn, and trumpet
I knew. The effect was as a sea breaking into song with all its waves.
The swaying tide swept this way, and then it fell back, and I followed
its retreat. It led me towards a Byzantine building--a sort of kiosk
near the park's centre. Round about stood crowded thousands, gathered
to a grand concert in the open air. What I had heard was, I think, a
wild Jaeger chorus; the night, the space, the scene, and my own mood,
had