I too felt those autumn suns and saw those
harvest moons, and I almost wished to be covered in with earth and
turf, deep out of their influence; for I could not live in their
light, nor make them comrades, nor yield them affection. But Ginevra
had a kind of spirit with her, empowered to give constant strength and
comfort, to gladden daylight and embalm darkness; the best of the good
genii that guard humanity curtained her with his wings, and canopied
her head with his bending form. By True Love was Ginevra followed:
never could she be alone. Was she insensible to this presence? It
seemed to me impossible: I could not realize such deadness. I imagined
her grateful in secret, loving now with reserve; but purposing one day
to show how much she loved: I pictured her faithful hero half
conscious of her coy fondness, and comforted by that consciousness: I
conceived an electric chord of sympathy between them, a fine chain of
mutual understanding, sustaining union through a separation of a
hundred leagues--carrying, across mound and hollow, communication by
prayer and wish. Ginevra gradually became with me a sort of heroine.
One day, perceiving this growing illusion, I said, "I really believe
my nerves are getting overstretched: my mind has suffered somewhat too
much a malady is growing upon it--what shall I do? How shall I keep
well?"
Indeed there was no way to keep well under the circumstances. At last
a day and night of peculiarly agonizing depression were succeeded by
physical illness, I took perforce to my bed. About this time the
Indian summer closed and the equinoctial storms began; and for nine
dark and wet days, of which the hours rushed on all turbulent, deaf,
dishevelled--bewildered with sounding hurricane--I lay in a strange
fever of the nerves and blood. Sleep went quite away. I used to rise
in the night, look round for her, beseech her earnestly to return. A
rattle of the window, a cry of the blast only replied---Sleep never
came!
I err. She came once, but in anger. Impatient of my importunity she
brought with her an avenging dream. By the clock of St. Jean Baptiste,
that dream remained scarce fifteen minutes--a brief space, but
sufficing to wring my whole frame with unknown anguish; to confer a
nameless experience that had the hue, the mien, the terror, the very
tone of a visitation from eternity. Between twelve and one that night
a cup was forced to my lips, black, strong, strange, drawn from no
well, but filled up seething from a bottomless and boundless sea.
Suffering, brewed in temporal or calculable measure, and mixed for
mortal lips, tastes not as this suffering tasted. Having drank and
woke, I thought all was over: the end come and past by. Trembling
fearfully--as consciousness returned--ready to cry out on some fellow-
creature to help me, only that I knew no fellow-creature was near
enough to catch the wild summons--Goton in her far distant attic could
not hear--I rose on my knees in bed. Some fearful hours went over me:
indescribably was I torn, racked and oppressed in mind. Amidst the
horrors of that dream I think the worst lay here. Methought the well-
loved dead, who had loved _me_ well in life, met me elsewhere,
alienated: galled was my inmost spirit with an unutterable sense of
despair about the future. Motive there was none why I should try to
recover or wish to live; and yet quite unendurable was the pitiless
and haughty voice in which Death challenged me to engage his unknown
terrors. When I tried to pray I could only utter these words: "From my
youth up Thy terrors have I suffered with a troubled mind."
Most true was it.
On bringing me my tea next morning Goton urged me to call in a doctor.
I would not: I thought no doctor could cure me.
One evening--and I was not delirious: I was in my sane mind, I got up
--I dressed myself, weak and shaking. The solitude and the stillness of
the long dormitory could not be borne any longer; the ghastly white
beds were turning into spectres--the coronal of each became a death's-
head, huge and sun-bleached--dead dreams of an elder world and
mightier race lay frozen in their wide gaping eyeholes. That evening
more firmly than ever fastened into my soul the conviction that Fate
was of stone, and Hope a false idol--blind, bloodless, and of granite
core. I felt, too, that the trial God had appointed me was gaining its
climax, and must now be turned by my own hands, hot, feeble, trembling
as they were. It rained still, and blew; but with more clemency, I
thought, than it had poured and raged all day. Twilight was falling,
and I deemed its influence pitiful; from the lattice I saw coming
night-clouds trailing low like banners drooping. It seemed to me that
at this hour there was affection and sorrow in Heaven above for all
pain suffered on earth beneath; the weight of my dreadful dream became
alleviated--that insufferable thought of being no more loved--no more
owned, half-yielded to hope of the contrary--I was sure this hope
would shine clearer if I got out from under this house-roof, which was
crushing as the slab of a tomb, and went outside the city to a certain
quiet hill, a long way distant in the fields. Covered with a cloak (I
could not be delirious, for I had sense and recollection to put on
warm clothing), forth I set. The bells of a church arrested me in
passing; they seemed to call me in to the _salut_, and I went in.
Any solemn rite, any spectacle of sincere worship, any opening for
appeal to God was as welcome to me then as bread to one in extremity
of want. I knelt down with others on the stone pavement. It was an old
solemn church, its pervading gloom not gilded but purpled by light
shed through stained glass.
Few worshippers were assembled, and, the _salut_ over, half of
them departed. I discovered soon that those left remained to confess.
I did not stir. Carefully every door of the church was shut; a holy
quiet sank upon, and a solemn shade gathered about us. After a space,
breathless and spent in prayer, a penitent approached the
confessional. I watched. She whispered her avowal; her shrift was
whispered back; she returned consoled. Another went, and another. A
pale lady, kneeling near me, said in a low, kind voice:--"Go