spoke of grapes; I was thinking of a fruit I like better
than your X---- hot-house grapes--an unique fruit, growing wild, which I
have marked as my own, and hope one day to gather and taste. It is of no
use your offering me the draught of bitterness, or threatening me with
death by thirst: I have the anticipation of sweetness on my palate; the
hope of freshness on my lips; I can reject the unsavoury, and endure the
exhausting."
"For how long?"
"Till the next opportunity for effort; and as the prize of success will
be a treasure after my own heart, I'll bring a bull's strength to the
struggle."
"Bad luck crushes bulls as easily as bullaces; and, I believe, the fury
dogs you: you were born with a wooden spoon in your mouth, depend on
it."
"I believe you; sad I mean to make my wooden spoon do the work of some
people's silver ladles: grasped firmly, and handled nimbly, even a
wooden spoon will shovel up broth."
Hunsden rose: "I see," said he; "I suppose you're one of those who
develop best unwatched, and act best unaided-work your own way. Now,
I'll go." And, without another word, he was going; at the door he
turned:--
"Crimsworth Hall is sold," said he.
"Sold!" was my echo.
"Yes; you know, of course, that your brother failed three months ago?"
"What! Edward Crimsworth?"
"Precisely; and his wife went home to her fathers; when affairs went
awry, his temper sympathized with them; he used her ill; I told you he
would be a tyrant to her some day; as to him--"
"Ay, as to him--what is become of him?"
"Nothing extraordinary--don't be alarmed; he put himself under the
protection of the court, compounded with his creditors--tenpence in
the pound; in six weeks set up again, coaxed back his wife, and is
flourishing like a green bay-tree."
"And Crimsworth Hall--was the furniture sold too?"
"Everything--from the grand piano down to the rolling-pin."
"And the contents of the oak dining-room--were they sold?"
"Of course; why should the sofas and chairs of that room be held more
sacred than those of any other?"
"And the pictures?"
"What pictures? Crimsworth had no special collection that I know of--he
did not profess to be an amateur."
"There were two portraits, one on each side the mantelpiece; you cannot
have forgotten them, Mr. Hunsden; you once noticed that of the lady--"
"Oh, I know! the thin-faced gentlewoman with a shawl put on like
drapery.--Why, as a matter of course, it would be sold among the other
things. If you had been rich, you might have bought it, for I remember
you said it represented your mother: you see what it is to be without a
sou."
I did. "But surely," I thought to myself, "I shall not always be so
poverty-stricken; I may one day buy it back yet.--Who purchased it? do
you know?" I asked.
"How is it likely? I never inquired who purchased anything; there spoke
the unpractical man--to imagine all the world is interested in what
interests himself! Now, good night--I'm off for Germany to-morrow
morning; I shall be back here in six weeks, and possibly I may call
and see you again; I wonder whether you'll be still out of place!"
he laughed, as mockingly, as heartlessly as Mephistopheles, and so
laughing, vanished.
Some people, however indifferent they may become after a considerable
space of absence, always contrive to leave a pleasant impression just
at parting; not so Hunsden, a conference with him affected one like a
draught of Peruvian bark; it seemed a concentration of the specially
harsh, stringent, bitter; whether, like bark, it invigorated, I scarcely
knew.
A ruffled mind makes a restless pillow; I slept little on the night
after this interview; towards morning I began to doze, but hardly had my
slumber become sleep, when I was roused from it by hearing a noise in
my sitting room, to which my bed-room adjoined--a step, and a shoving of
furniture; the movement lasted barely two minutes; with the closing
of the door it ceased. I listened; not a mouse stirred; perhaps I
had dreamt it; perhaps a locataire had made a mistake, and entered my
apartment instead of his own. It was yet but five o'clock; neither I nor
the day were wide awake; I turned, and was soon unconscious. When I did
rise, about two hours later, I had forgotten the circumstance; the first
thing I saw, however, on quitting my chamber, recalled it; just pushed
in at the door of my sitting-room, and still standing on end, was a
wooden packing-case--a rough deal affair, wide but shallow; a porter
had doubtless shoved it forward, but seeing no occupant of the room, had
left it at the entrance.
"That is none of mine," thought I, approaching; "it must be meant for
somebody else." I stooped to examine the address:--
"Wm. Crimsworth, Esq., No --, -- St., Brussels."
I was puzzled, but concluding that the best way to obtain information
was to ask within, I cut the cords and opened the case. Green baize
enveloped its contents, sewn carefully at the sides; I ripped the
pack-thread with my pen-knife, and still, as the seam gave way, glimpses
of gilding appeared through the widening interstices. Boards and baize
being at length removed, I lifted from the case a large picture, in a
magnificent frame; leaning it against a chair, in a position where the
light from the window fell favourably upon it, I stepped back--already I
had mounted my spectacles. A portrait-painter's sky (the most sombre and
threatening of welkins), and distant trees of a conventional depth of
hue, raised in full relief a pale, pensive-looking female face, shadowed
with soft dark hair, almost blending with the equally dark clouds;
large, solemn eyes looked reflectively into mine; a thin cheek rested
on a delicate little hand; a shawl, artistically draped, half hid, half
showed a slight figure. A listener (had there been one) might have heard
me, after ten minutes' silent gazing, utter the word "Mother!" I might
have said more--but with me, the first word uttered aloud in soliloquy
rouses consciousness; it reminds me that only crazy people talk to
themselves, and then I think out my monologue, instead of speaking it.
I had thought a long while, and a long while had contemplated the
intelligence, the sweetness, and--alas! the sadness also of those fine,
grey eyes, the mental power of that forehead, and the rare sensibility
of that serious mouth, when my glance, travelling downwards, fell on a
narrow billet, stuck in the