him questions, to show any eagerness of curiosity; if he chose to
explain, he might, but the explanation should be a perfectly voluntary
one on his part; I thought he was entering upon it.
"You owe me a debt of gratitude," were his first words.
"Do I?" said I; "I hope it is not a large one, for I am much too poor to
charge myself with heavy liabilities of any kind."
"Then declare yourself bankrupt at once, for this liability is a ton
weight at least. When I came in I found your fire out, and I had it lit
again, and made that sulky drab of a servant stay and blow at it with
the bellows till it had burnt up properly; now, say 'Thank you!'"
"Not till I have had something to eat; I can thank nobody while I am so
famished."
I rang the bell and ordered tea and some cold meat.
"Cold meat!" exclaimed Hunsden, as the servant closed the door, "what a
glutton you are; man! Meat with tea! you'll die of eating too much."
"No, Mr. Hunsden, I shall not." I felt a necessity for contradicting
him; I was irritated with hunger, and irritated at seeing him there, and
irritated at the continued roughness of his manner.
"It is over-eating that makes you so ill-tempered," said he.
"How do you know?" I demanded. "It is like you to give a pragmatical
opinion without being acquainted with any of the circumstances of the
case; I have had no dinner."
What I said was petulant and snappish enough, and Hunsden only replied
by looking in my face and laughing.
"Poor thing!" he whined, after a pause. "It has had no dinner, has it?
What! I suppose its master would not let it come home. Did Crimsworth
order you to fast by way of punishment, William!"
"No, Mr. Hunsden. Fortunately at this sulky juncture, tea, was brought
in, and I fell to upon some bread and butter and cold beef directly.
Having cleared a plateful, I became so far humanized as to intimate to
Mr. Hunsden that he need not sit there staring, but might come to the
table and do as I did, if he liked."
"But I don't like in the least," said he, and therewith he summoned the
servant by a fresh pull of the bell-rope, and intimated a desire to
have a glass of toast-and-water. "And some more coal," he added; "Mr.
Crimsworth shall keep a good fire while I stay."
His orders being executed, he wheeled his chair round to the table, so
as to be opposite me.
"Well," he proceeded. "You are out of work, I suppose."
"Yes," said I; and not disposed to show the satisfaction I felt on this
point, I, yielding to the whim of the moment, took up the subject as
though I considered myself aggrieved rather than benefited by what had
been done. "Yes--thanks to you, I am. Crimsworth turned me off at
a minute's notice, owing to some interference of yours at a public
meeting, I understand."
"Ah! what! he mentioned that? He observed me signalling the lads, did
he? What had he to say about his friend Hunsden--anything sweet?"
"He called you a treacherous villain."
"Oh, he hardly knows me yet! I'm one of those shy people who don't come
out all at once, and he is only just beginning to make my acquaintance,
but he'll find I've some good qualities--excellent ones! The Hunsdens
were always unrivalled at tracking a rascal; a downright, dishonourable
villain is their natural prey--they could not keep off him wherever
they met him; you used the word pragmatical just now--that word is the
property of our family; it has been applied to us from generation to
generation; we have fine noses for abuses; we scent a scoundrel a mile
off; we are reformers born, radical reformers; and it was impossible for
me to live in the same town with Crimsworth, to come into weekly contact
with him, to witness some of his conduct to you (for whom personally
I care nothing; I only consider the brutal injustice with which he
violated your natural claim to equality)--I say it was impossible for
me to be thus situated and not feel the angel or the demon of my race
at work within me. I followed my instinct, opposed a tyrant, and broke a
chain."
Now this speech interested me much, both because it brought out
Hunsden's character, and because it explained his motives; it interested
me so much that I forgot to reply to it, and sat silent, pondering over
a throng of ideas it had suggested.
"Are you grateful to me?" he asked, presently.
In fact I was grateful, or almost so, and I believe I half liked him at
the moment, notwithstanding his proviso that what he had done was not
out of regard for me. But human nature is perverse. Impossible to answer
his blunt question in the affirmative, so I disclaimed all tendency
to gratitude, and advised him if he expected any reward for his
championship, to look for it in a better world, as he was not likely
to meet with it here. In reply he termed me "a dry-hearted aristocratic
scamp," whereupon I again charged him with having taken the bread out of
my mouth.
"Your bread was dirty, man!" cried Hunsden--"dirty and unwholesome!
It came through the hands of a tyrant, for I tell you Crimsworth is a
tyrant,--a tyrant to his workpeople, a tyrant to his clerks, and will
some day be a tyrant to his wife."
"Nonsense! bread is bread, and a salary is a salary. I've lost mine, and
through your means."
"There's sense in what you say, after all," rejoined Hunsden. "I must
say I am rather agreeably surprised to hear you make so practical
an observation as that last. I had imagined now, from my previous
observation of your character, that the sentimental delight you would
have taken in your newly regained liberty would, for a while at least,
have effaced all ideas of forethought and prudence. I think better of
you for looking steadily to the needful."
"Looking steadily to the needful! How can I do otherwise? I must live,
and to live I must have what you call 'the needful,' which I can only
get by working. I repeat it, you have taken my work from me."
"What do you mean to do?" pursued Hunsden coolly. "You have influential
relations; I suppose they'll soon provide you with another place."
"Influential relations? Who?