to Mary de Bassompierre, I visited her with pleasure, though I
would not live with her. My visits soon taught me that it was unlikely
even my occasional and voluntary society would long be indispensable
to her. M. de Bassompierre, for his part, seemed impervious to this
conjecture, blind to this possibility; unconscious as any child to the
signs, the likelihoods, the fitful beginnings of what, when it drew to
an end, he might not approve.
Whether or not he would cordially approve, I used to speculate.
Difficult to say. He was much taken up with scientific interests;
keen, intent, and somewhat oppugnant in what concerned his favourite
pursuits, but unsuspicious and trustful in the ordinary affairs of
life. From all I could gather, he seemed to regard his "daughterling"
as still but a child, and probably had not yet admitted the notion
that others might look on her in a different light: he would speak of
what should be done when "Polly" was a woman, when she should be grown
up; and "Polly," standing beside his chair, would sometimes smile and
take his honoured head between her little hands, and kiss his iron-
grey locks; and, at other times, she would pout and toss her curls:
but she never said, "Papa, I _am_ grown up."
She had different moods for different people. With her father she
really was still a child, or child-like, affectionate, merry, and
playful. With me she was serious, and as womanly as thought and
feeling could make her. With Mrs. Bretton she was docile and reliant,
but not expansive. With Graham she was shy, at present very shy; at
moments she tried to be cold; on occasion she endeavoured to shun him.
His step made her start; his entrance hushed her; when he spoke, her
answers failed of fluency; when he took leave, she remained self-vexed
and disconcerted. Even her father noticed this demeanour in her.
"My little Polly," he said once, "you live too retired a life; if you
grow to be a woman with these shy manners, you will hardly be fitted
for society. You really make quite a stranger of Dr. Bretton: how is
this? Don't you remember that, as a little girl, you used to be rather
partial to him?"
"_Rather_, papa," echoed she, with her slightly dry, yet gentle
and simple tone.
"And you don't like him now? What has he done?"
"Nothing. Y--e--s, I like him a little; but we are grown strange to
each other."
"Then rub it off, Polly; rub the rust and the strangeness off. Talk
away when he is here, and have no fear of him?"
"_He_ does not talk much. Is he afraid of me, do you think,
papa?"
"Oh, to be sure, what man would not be afraid of such a little silent
lady?"
"Then tell him some day not to mind my being silent. Say that it is my
way, and that I have no unfriendly intention."
"Your way, you little chatter-box? So far from being your way, it is
only your whim!"
"Well, I'll improve, papa."
And very pretty was the grace with which, the next day, she tried to
keep her word. I saw her make the effort to converse affably with Dr.
John on general topics. The attention called into her guest's face a
pleasurable glow; he met her with caution, and replied to her in his
softest tones, as if there was a kind of gossamer happiness hanging in
the air which he feared to disturb by drawing too deep a breath.
Certainly, in her timid yet earnest advance to friendship, it could
not be denied that there was a most exquisite and fairy charm.
When the Doctor was gone, she approached her father's chair.
"Did I keep my word, papa? Did I behave better?"
"My Polly behaved like a queen. I shall become quite proud of her if
this improvement continues. By-and-by we shall see her receiving my
guests with quite a calm, grand manner. Miss Lucy and I will have to
look about us, and polish up all our best airs and graces lest we
should be thrown into the shade. Still, Polly, there is a little
flutter, a little tendency to stammer now and then, and even, to lisp
as you lisped when you were six years old."
"No, papa," interrupted she indignantly, "that can't be true."
"I appeal to Miss Lucy. Did she not, in answering Dr. Bretton's
question as to whether she had ever seen the palace of the Prince of
Bois l'Etang, say, 'yeth,' she had been there 'theveral' times?"
"Papa, you are satirical, you are mechant! I can pronounce all the
letters of the alphabet as clearly as you can. But tell me this you
are very particular in making me be civil to Dr. Bretton, do you like
him yourself?"
"To be sure: for old acquaintance sake I like him: then he is a very
good son to his mother; besides being a kind-hearted fellow and clever
in his profession: yes, the callant is well enough."
"_Callant_! Ah, Scotchman! Papa, is it the Edinburgh or the
Aberdeen accent you have?"
"Both, my pet, both: and doubtless the Glaswegian into the bargain. It
is that which enables me to speak French so well: a gude Scots tongue
always succeeds well at the French."
"_The_ French! Scotch again: incorrigible papa. You, too, need
schooling."
"Well, Polly, you must persuade Miss Snowe to undertake both you and
me; to make you steady and womanly, and me refined and classical."
The light in which M. de Bassompierre evidently regarded "Miss Snowe,"
used to occasion me much inward edification. What contradictory
attributes of character we sometimes find ascribed to us, according to
the eye with which we are viewed! Madame Beck esteemed me learned and
blue; Miss Fanshawe, caustic, ironic, and cynical; Mr. Home, a model
teacher, the essence of the sedate and discreet: somewhat
conventional, perhaps, too strict, limited, and scrupulous, but still
the pink and pattern of governess-correctness; whilst another person,
Professor Paul Emanuel, to wit, never lost an opportunity of
intimating his opinion that mine was rather a fiery and rash nature--
adventurous, indocile, and audacious. I smiled at them all. If any one
knew me it was little Paulina Mary.
As I would not be Paulina's nominal and paid companion, genial and
harmonious as I began to find her intercourse, she persuaded me to
join her in some study, as a regular and settled means of sustaining
communication: she proposed the German language, which, like myself,
she found difficult of mastery. We agreed