single instant, when a look,
rather solicitous than curious, stole my way--speaking what somehow
stilled my heart like "the south-wind quieting the earth." Graham's
thoughts of me were not entirely those of a frozen indifference, after
all. I believe in that goodly mansion, his heart, he kept one little
place under the sky-lights where Lucy might have entertainment, if she
chose to call. It was not so handsome as the chambers where he lodged
his male friends; it was not like the hall where he accommodated his
philanthropy, or the library where he treasured his science, still
less did it resemble the pavilion where his marriage feast was
splendidly spread; yet, gradually, by long and equal kindness, he
proved to me that he kept one little closet, over the door of which
was written "Lucy's Room." I kept a place for him, too--a place of
which I never took the measure, either by rule or compass: I think it
was like the tent of Peri-Banou. All my life long I carried it folded
in the hollow of my hand yet, released from that hold and
constriction, I know not but its innate capacity for expanse might
have magnified it into a tabernacle for a host.
Forbearing as he was to-night, I could not stay in this proximity;
this dangerous place and seat must be given up: I watched my
opportunity, rose, and stole away. He might think, he might even
believe that Lucy was contained within that shawl, and sheltered under
that hat; he never could be certain, for he did not see my face.
Surely the spirit of restlessness was by this time appeased? Had I not
had enough of adventure? Did I not begin to flag, quail, and wish for
safety under a roof? Not so. I still loathed my bed in the school
dormitory more than words can express: I clung to whatever could
distract thought. Somehow I felt, too, that the night's drama was but
begun, that the prologue was scarce spoken: throughout this woody and
turfy theatre reigned a shadow of mystery; actors and incidents
unlooked-for, waited behind the scenes: I thought so foreboding told
me as much.
Straying at random, obeying the push of every chance elbow, I was
brought to a quarter where trees planted in clusters, or towering
singly, broke up somewhat the dense packing of the crowd, and gave it
a more scattered character. These confines were far from the music,
and somewhat aloof even from the lamps, but there was sound enough to
soothe, and with that full, high moon, lamps were scarce needed. Here
had chiefly settled family-groups, burgher-parents; some of them, late
as was the hour, actually surrounded by their children, with whom it
had not been thought advisable to venture into the closer throng.
Three fine tall trees growing close, almost twined stem within stem,
lifted a thick canopy of shade above a green knoll, crowned with a
seat--a seat which might have held several, yet it seemed abandoned to
one, the remaining members of the fortunate party in possession of
this site standing dutifully round; yet, amongst this reverend circle
was a lady, holding by the hand a little girl.
When I caught sight of this little girl, she was twisting herself
round on her heel, swinging from her conductress's hand, flinging
herself from side to side with wanton and fantastic gyrations. These
perverse movements arrested my attention, they struck me as of a
character fearfully familiar. On close inspection, no less so appeared
the child's equipment; the lilac silk pelisse, the small swansdown
boa, the white bonnet--the whole holiday toilette, in short, was the
gala garb of a cherub but too well known, of that tadpole, Desiree
Beck--and Desiree Beck it was--she, or an imp in her likeness.
I might have taken this discovery as a thunder-clap, but such
hyperbole would have been premature; discovery was destined to rise
more than one degree, ere it reached its climax.
On whose hand could the amiable Desiree swing thus selfishly, whose
glove could she tear thus recklessly, whose arm thus strain with
impunity, or on the borders of whose dress thus turn and trample
insolently, if not the hand, glove, arm, and robe of her lady-mother?
And there, in an Indian shawl and a pale-green crape bonnet--there,
fresh, portly, blithe, and pleasant--there stood Madame Beck.
Curious! I had certainly deemed Madame in her bed, and Desiree in her
crib, at this blessed minute, sleeping, both of them, the sleep of the
just, within the sacred walls, amidst the profound seclusion of the
Rue Fossette. Most certainly also they did not picture "Meess Lucie"
otherwise engaged; and here we all three were taking our "ebats" in
the fete-blazing park at midnight!
The fact was, Madame was only acting according to her quite
justifiable wont. I remembered now I had heard it said among the
teachers--though without at the time particularly noticing the gossip
--that often, when we thought Madame in her chamber, sleeping, she
was gone, full-dressed, to take her pleasure at operas, or plays, or
balls. Madame had no sort of taste for a monastic life, and took care
--largely, though discreetly--to season her existence with a relish of
the world.
Half a dozen gentlemen of her friends stood about her. Amongst these,
I was not slow to recognise two or three. There was her brother, M.
Victor Kint; there was another person, moustached and with long hair--
a calm, taciturn man, but whose traits bore a stamp and a semblance I
could not mark unmoved. Amidst reserve and phlegm, amidst contrasts of
character and of countenance, something there still was which recalled
a face--mobile, fervent, feeling--a face changeable, now clouded, and
now alight--a face from my world taken away, for my eyes lost, but
where my best spring-hours of life had alternated in shadow and in
glow; that face, where I had often seen movements so near the signs of
genius--that why there did not shine fully out the undoubted fire, the
thing, the spirit, and the secret itself--I could never tell. Yes--
this Josef Emanuel--this man of peace--reminded me of his ardent
brother.
Besides Messieurs Victor and Josef, I knew another of this party. This
third person stood behind and in the shade, his attitude too was
stooping, yet his dress and bald white head made him the most
conspicuous figure of the group. He was an ecclesiastic: he was Pere
Silas. Do not fancy, reader, that there was any inconsistency in the
priest's presence at this fete. This was not considered a