feelings of
union and hope made themselves profoundly felt in the heart; affection
and deep esteem and dawning trust had each fastened its bond.
What quiet lessons I had about this time! No more taunts on my
"intellect," no more menaces of grating public shows! How sweetly, for
the jealous gibe, and the more jealous, half-passionate eulogy, were
substituted a mute, indulgent help, a fond guidance, and a tender
forbearance which forgave but never praised. There were times when he
would sit for many minutes and not speak at all; and when dusk or duty
brought separation, he would leave with words like these, "Il est
doux, le repos! Il est precieux le calme bonheur!"
One evening, not ten short days since, he joined me whilst walking in
my alley. He took my hand. I looked up in his face. I thought he meant
to arrest my attention.
"Bonne petite amie!" said he, softly; "douce consolatrice!" But
through his touch, and with his words, a new feeling and a strange
thought found a course. Could it be that he was becoming more than
friend or brother? Did his look speak a kindness beyond fraternity or
amity?
His eloquent look had more to say, his hand drew me forward, his
interpreting lips stirred. No. Not now. Here into the twilight alley
broke an interruption: it came dual and ominous: we faced two bodeful
forms--a woman's and a priest's--Madame Beck and Pere Silas.
The aspect of the latter I shall never forget. On the first impulse it
expressed a Jean-Jacques sensibility, stirred by the signs of
affection just surprised; then, immediately, darkened over it the
jaundice of ecclesiastical jealousy. He spoke to _me_ with
unction. He looked on his pupil with sternness. As to Madame Beck,
she, of course, saw nothing--nothing; though her kinsman retained in
her presence the hand of the heretic foreigner, not suffering
withdrawal, but clasping it close and fast.
Following these incidents, that sudden announcement of departure had
struck me at first as incredible. Indeed, it was only frequent
repetition, and the credence of the hundred and fifty minds round me,
which forced on me its full acceptance. As to that week of suspense,
with its blank, yet burning days, which brought from him no word of
explanation--I remember, but I cannot describe its passage.
The last day broke. Now would he visit us. Now he would come and speak
his farewell, or he would vanish mute, and be seen by us nevermore.
This alternative seemed to be present in the mind of not a living
creature in that school. All rose at the usual hour; all breakfasted
as usual; all, without reference to, or apparent thought of their late
Professor, betook themselves with wonted phlegm to their ordinary
duties.
So oblivious was the house, so tame, so trained its proceedings, so
inexpectant its aspect--I scarce knew how to breathe in an atmosphere
thus stagnant, thus smothering. Would no one lend me a voice? Had no
one a wish, no one a word, no one a prayer to which I could say--Amen?
I had seen them unanimous in demand for the merest trifle--a treat, a
holiday, a lesson's remission; they could not, they _would_ not
now band to besiege Madame Beck, and insist on a last interview with a
Master who had certainly been loved, at least by some--loved as
_they_ could love--but, oh! what _is_ the love of the multitude?
I knew where he lived: I knew where he was to be heard of, or
communicated with; the distance was scarce a stone's-throw: had it
been in the next room--unsummoned, I could make no use of my
knowledge. To follow, to seek out, to remind, to recall--for these
things I had no faculty.
M. Emanuel might have passed within reach of my arm: had he passed
silent and unnoticing, silent and stirless should I have suffered him
to go by.
Morning wasted. Afternoon came, and I thought all was over. My heart
trembled in its place. My blood was troubled in its current. I was
quite sick, and hardly knew how to keep at my post--or do my work. Yet
the little world round me plodded on indifferent; all seemed jocund,
free of care, or fear, or thought: the very pupils who, seven days
since, had wept hysterically at a startling piece of news, appeared
quite to have forgotten the news, its import, and their emotion.
A little before five o'clock, the hour of dismissal, Madame Beck sent
for me to her chamber, to read over and translate some English letter
she had received, and to write for her the answer. Before settling to
this work, I observed that she softly closed the two doors of her
chamber; she even shut and fastened the casement, though it was a hot
day, and free circulation of air was usually regarded by her as
indispensable. Why this precaution? A keen suspicion, an almost fierce
distrust, suggested such question. Did she want to exclude sound? what
sound?
I listened as I had never listened before; I listened like the evening
and winter-wolf, snuffing the snow, scenting prey, and hearing far off
the traveller's tramp. Yet I could both listen and write. About the
middle of the letter I heard--what checked my pen--a tread in the
vestibule. No door-bell had rung; Rosine--acting doubtless by orders--
had anticipated such reveillee. Madame saw me halt. She coughed, made
a bustle, spoke louder. The tread had passed on to the classes.
"Proceed," said Madame; but my hand was fettered, my ear enchained, my
thoughts were carried off captive.
The classes formed another building; the hall parted them from the
dwelling-house: despite distance and partition, I heard the sudden
stir of numbers, a whole division rising at once.
"They are putting away work," said Madame.
It was indeed the hour to put away work, but why that sudden hush--
that instant quell of the tumult?
"Wait, Madame--I will see what it is."
And I put down my pen and left her. Left her? No: she would not be
left: powerless to detain me, she rose and followed, close as my
shadow. I turned on the last step of the stair.
"Are you coming, too?" I asked.
"Yes," said she; meeting my glance with a peculiar aspect--a look,
clouded, yet resolute.
We proceeded then, not together, but she walked in my steps.
He was come. Entering the first classe, I saw him. There, once more
appeared the form most familiar. I doubt not they had tried to keep
him away, but he was come.
The girls stood in a