worldless presence.
When the tray came in, and the bustle of supper commenced, he just
said, as he retired, that he wished me a good night and sweet dreams;
and a good night and sweet dreams I had.
CHAPTER XXX.
M. PAUL.
Yet the reader is advised not to be in any hurry with his kindly
conclusions, or to suppose, with an over-hasty charity, that from that
day M. Paul became a changed character--easy to live with, and no
longer apt to flash danger and discomfort round him.
No; he was naturally a little man of unreasonable moods. When over-
wrought, which he often was, he became acutely irritable; and,
besides, his veins were dark with a livid belladonna tincture, the
essence of jealousy. I do not mean merely the tender jealousy of the
heart, but that sterner, narrower sentiment whose seat is in the head.
I used to think, as I Sat looking at M. Paul, while he was knitting
his brow or protruding his lip over some exercise of mine, which had
not as many faults as he wished (for he liked me to commit faults: a
knot of blunders was sweet to him as a cluster of nuts), that he had
points of resemblance to Napoleon Bonaparte. I think so still.
In a shameless disregard of magnanimity, he resembled the great
Emperor. M. Paul would have quarrelled with twenty learned women,
would have unblushingly carried on a system of petty bickering and
recrimination with a whole capital of coteries, never troubling
himself about loss or lack of dignity. He would have exiled fifty
Madame de Staels, if, they had annoyed, offended, outrivalled, or
opposed him.
I well remember a hot episode of his with a certain Madame Panache--a
lady temporarily employed by Madame Beck to give lessons in history.
She was clever--that is, she knew a good deal; and, besides,
thoroughly possessed the art of making the most of what she knew; of
words and confidence she held unlimited command. Her personal
appearance was far from destitute of advantages; I believe many people
would have pronounced her "a fine woman;" and yet there were points in
her robust and ample attractions, as well as in her bustling and
demonstrative presence, which, it appeared, the nice and capricious
tastes of M. Paul could not away with. The sound of her voice, echoing
through the carre, would put him into a strange taking; her long free
step--almost stride--along the corridor, would often make him snatch
up his papers and decamp on the instant.
With malicious intent he bethought himself, one day, to intrude on her
class; as quick as lightning he gathered her method of instruction; it
differed from a pet plan of his own. With little ceremony, and less
courtesy, he pointed out what he termed her errors. Whether he
expected submission and attention, I know not; he met an acrid
opposition, accompanied by a round reprimand for his certainly
unjustifiable interference.
Instead of withdrawing with dignity, as he might still have done, he
threw down the gauntlet of defiance. Madame Panache, bellicose as a
Penthesilea, picked it up in a minute. She snapped her fingers in the
intermeddler's face; she rushed upon him with a storm of words. M.
Emanuel was eloquent; but Madame Panache was voluble. A system of
fierce antagonism ensued. Instead of laughing in his sleeve at his
fair foe, with all her sore amour-propre and loud self-assertion, M.
Paul detested her with intense seriousness; he honoured her with his
earnest fury; he pursued her vindictively and implacably, refusing to
rest peaceably in his bed, to derive due benefit from his meals, or
even serenely to relish his cigar, till she was fairly rooted out of
the establishment. The Professor conquered, but I cannot say that the
laurels of this victory shadowed gracefully his temples. Once I
ventured to hint as much. To my great surprise he allowed that I might
be right, but averred that when brought into contact with either men
or women of the coarse, self-complacent quality, whereof Madame
Panache was a specimen, he had no control over his own passions; an
unspeakable and active aversion impelled him to a war of
extermination.
Three months afterwards, hearing that his vanquished foe had met with
reverses, and was likely to be really distressed for want of
employment, he forgot his hatred, and alike active in good and evil,
he moved heaven and earth till he found her a place. Upon her coming
to make up former differences, and thank him for his recent kindness,
the old voice--a little loud--the old manner--a little forward--so
acted upon him that in ten minutes he started up and bowed her, or
rather himself, out of the room, in a transport of nervous irritation.
To pursue a somewhat audacious parallel, in a love of power, in an
eager grasp after supremacy, M. Emanuel was like Bonaparte. He was a
man not always to be submitted to. Sometimes it was needful to resist;
it was right to stand still, to look up into his eyes and tell him
that his requirements went beyond reason--that his absolutism verged
on tyranny.
The dawnings, the first developments of peculiar talent appearing
within his range, and under his rule, curiously excited, even
disturbed him. He watched its struggle into life with a scowl; he held
back his hand--perhaps said, "Come on if you have strength," but would
not aid the birth.
When the pang and peril of the first conflict were over, when the
breath of life was drawn, when he saw the lungs expand and contract,
when he felt the heart beat and discovered life in the eye, he did not
yet offer to foster.
"Prove yourself true ere I cherish you," was his ordinance; and how
difficult he made that proof! What thorns and briers, what flints, he
strewed in the path of feet not inured to rough travel! He watched
tearlessly--ordeals that he exacted should be passed through--
fearlessly. He followed footprints that, as they approached the
bourne, were sometimes marked in blood--followed them grimly, holding
the austerest police-watch over the pain-pressed pilgrim. And when at
last he allowed a rest, before slumber might close the eyelids, he
opened those same lids wide, with pitiless finger and thumb, and gazed
deep through the pupil and the irids into the brain, into the heart,
to search if Vanity, or Pride, or Falsehood, in any of its subtlest
forms, was discoverable in the furthest recess of existence. If, at
last, he let the neophyte sleep, it was but a moment; he woke