closed: buried, if you will, in a long
prayer. A great many women and girls are supposed to pass their lives
something in that fashion; why not I with the rest?
Picture me then idle, basking, plump, and happy, stretched on a
cushioned deck, warmed with constant sunshine, rocked by breezes
indolently soft. However, it cannot be concealed that, in that case, I
must somehow have fallen overboard, or that there must have been wreck
at last. I too well remember a time--a long time--of cold, of danger,
of contention. To this hour, when I have the nightmare, it repeats the
rush and saltness of briny waves in my throat, and their icy pressure
on my lungs. I even know there was a storm, and that not of one hour
nor one day. For many days and nights neither sun nor stars appeared;
we cast with our own hands the tackling out of the ship; a heavy
tempest lay on us; all hope that we should be saved was taken away. In
fine, the ship was lost, the crew perished.
As far as I recollect, I complained to no one about these troubles.
Indeed, to whom could I complain? Of Mrs. Bretton I had long lost
sight. Impediments, raised by others, had, years ago, come in the way
of our intercourse, and cut it off. Besides, time had brought changes
for her, too: the handsome property of which she was left guardian for
her son, and which had been chiefly invested in some joint-stock
undertaking, had melted, it was said, to a fraction of its original
amount. Graham, I learned from incidental rumours, had adopted a
profession; both he and his mother were gone from Bretton, and were
understood to be now in London. Thus, there remained no possibility of
dependence on others; to myself alone could I look. I know not that I
was of a self-reliant or active nature; but self-reliance and exertion
were forced upon me by circumstances, as they are upon thousands
besides; and when Miss Marchmont, a maiden lady of our neighbourhood,
sent for me, I obeyed her behest, in the hope that she might assign me
some task I could undertake.
Miss Marchmont was a woman of fortune, and lived in a handsome
residence; but she was a rheumatic cripple, impotent, foot and hand,
and had been so for twenty years. She always sat upstairs: her
drawing-room adjoined her bed-room. I had often heard of Miss
Marchmont, and of her peculiarities (she had the character of being
very eccentric), but till now had never seen her. I found her a
furrowed, grey-haired woman, grave with solitude, stern with long
affliction, irritable also, and perhaps exacting. It seemed that a
maid, or rather companion, who had waited on her for some years, was
about to be married; and she, hearing of my bereaved lot, had sent for
me, with the idea that I might supply this person's place. She made
the proposal to me after tea, as she and I sat alone by her fireside.
"It will not be an easy life;" said she candidly, "for I require a
good deal of attention, and you will be much confined; yet, perhaps,
contrasted with the existence you have lately led, it may appear
tolerable."
I reflected. Of course it ought to appear tolerable, I argued
inwardly; but somehow, by some strange fatality, it would not. To live
here, in this close room, the watcher of suffering--sometimes,
perhaps, the butt of temper--through all that was to come of my youth;
while all that was gone had passed, to say the least, not blissfully!
My heart sunk one moment, then it revived; for though I forced myself
to _realise_ evils, I think I was too prosaic to _idealise_,
and consequently to exaggerate them.
"My doubt is whether I should have strength for the undertaking," I
observed.
"That is my own scruple," said she; "for you look a worn-out
creature."
So I did. I saw myself in the glass, in my mourning-dress, a faded,
hollow-eyed vision. Yet I thought little of the wan spectacle. The
blight, I believed, was chiefly external: I still felt life at life's
sources.
"What else have you in view--anything?"
"Nothing clear as yet: but I may find something."
"So you imagine: perhaps you are right. Try your own method, then; and
if it does not succeed, test mine. The chance I have offered shall be
left open to you for three months."
This was kind. I told her so, and expressed my gratitude. While I was
speaking, a paroxysm of pain came on. I ministered to her; made the
necessary applications, according to her directions, and, by the time
she was relieved, a sort of intimacy was already formed between us. I,
for my part, had learned from the manner in which she bore this
attack, that she was a firm, patient woman (patient under physical
pain, though sometimes perhaps excitable under long mental canker);
and she, from the good-will with which I succoured her, discovered
that she could influence my sympathies (such as they were). She sent
for me the next day; for five or six successive days she claimed my
company. Closer acquaintance, while it developed both faults and
eccentricities, opened, at the same time, a view of a character I
could respect. Stern and even morose as she sometimes was, I could
wait on her and sit beside her with that calm which always blesses us
when we are sensible that our manners, presence, contact, please and
soothe the persons we serve. Even when she scolded me--which she did,
now and then, very tartly--it was in such a way as did not humiliate,
and left no sting; it was rather like an irascible mother rating her
daughter, than a harsh mistress lecturing a dependant: lecture,
indeed, she could not, though she could occasionally storm. Moreover,
a vein of reason ever ran through her passion: she was logical even
when fierce. Ere long a growing sense of attachment began to present
the thought of staying with her as companion in quite a new light; in
another week I had agreed to remain.
Two hot, close rooms thus became my world; and a crippled old woman,
my mistress, my friend, my all. Her service was my duty--her pain, my
suffering--her relief, my hope--her anger, my punishment--her regard,
my reward. I forgot that there were fields, woods, rivers, seas, an
ever-changing sky outside the steam-dimmed lattice of this sick
chamber; I was almost content to forget it. All within me became
narrowed