VILLETTE.
BY
CHARLOTTE BRONTE.
CONTENTS
CHAPTER
I. BRETTON
II. PAULINA
III. THE PLAYMATES
IV. MISS MARCHMONT
V. TURNING A NEW LEAF
VI. LONDON
VII. VILLETTE
VIII. MADAME BECK
IX. ISIDORE
X. DR. JOHN
XI. THE PORTRESS'S CABINET
XII. THE CASKET
XIII. A SNEEZE OUT OF SEASON
XIV. THE FETE
XV. THE LONG VACATION
XVI. AULD LANG SYNE
XVII. LA TERRASSE
XVIII. WE QUARREL
XIX. THE CLEOPATRA
XX. THE CONCERT
XXI. REACTION
XXII. THE LETTER
XXIII. VASHTI
XXIV. M. DE BASSOMPIERRE
XXV. THE LITTLE COUNTESS
XXVI. A BURIAL
XXVII. THE HOTEL CRECY
XXVIII. THE WATCHGUARD
XXIX. MONSIEUR'S FETE
XXX. M. PAUL
XXXI. THE DRYAD
XXXII. THE FIRST LETTER
XXXIII. M. PAUL KEEPS HIS PROMISE
XXXIV. MALEVOLA
XXXV. FRATERNITY
XXXVI. THE APPLE OF DISCORD
XXXVII. SUNSHINE
XXXVIII. CLOUD
XXXIX. OLD AND NEW ACQUAINTANCE
XL. THE HAPPY PAIR
XLI. FAUBOURG CLOTILDE
XLII. FINIS
VILLETTE.
CHAPTER I.
BRETTON.
My godmother lived in a handsome house in the clean and ancient town
of Bretton. Her husband's family had been residents there for
generations, and bore, indeed, the name of their birthplace--Bretton
of Bretton: whether by coincidence, or because some remote ancestor
had been a personage of sufficient importance to leave his name to his
neighbourhood, I know not.
When I was a girl I went to Bretton about twice a year, and well I
liked the visit. The house and its inmates specially suited me. The
large peaceful rooms, the well-arranged furniture, the clear wide
windows, the balcony outside, looking down on a fine antique street,
where Sundays and holidays seemed always to abide--so quiet was its
atmosphere, so clean its pavement--these things pleased me well.
One child in a household of grown people is usually made very much of,
and in a quiet way I was a good deal taken notice of by Mrs. Bretton,
who had been left a widow, with one son, before I knew her; her
husband, a physician, having died while she was yet a young and
handsome woman.
She was not young, as I remember her, but she was still handsome,
tall, well-made, and though dark for an Englishwoman, yet wearing
always the clearness of health in her brunette cheek, and its vivacity
in a pair of fine, cheerful black eyes. People esteemed it a grievous
pity that she had not conferred her complexion on her son, whose eyes
were blue--though, even in boyhood, very piercing--and the colour of
his long hair such as friends did not venture to specify, except as
the sun shone on it, when they called it golden. He inherited the
lines of his mother's features, however; also her good teeth, her
stature (or the promise of her stature, for he was not yet full-
grown), and, what was better, her health without flaw, and her spirits
of that tone and equality which are better than a fortune to the
possessor.
In the autumn of the year ---- I was staying at Bretton; my godmother
having come in person to claim me of the kinsfolk with whom was at
that time fixed my permanent residence. I believe she then plainly saw
events coming, whose very shadow I scarce guessed; yet of which the
faint suspicion sufficed to impart unsettled sadness, and made me glad
to change scene and society.
Time always flowed smoothly for me at my godmother's side; not with
tumultuous swiftness, but blandly, like the gliding of a full river
through a plain. My visits to her resembled the sojourn of Christian
and Hopeful beside a certain pleasant stream, with "green trees on
each bank, and meadows beautified with lilies all the year round." The
charm of variety there was not, nor the excitement of incident; but I
liked peace so well, and sought stimulus so little, that when the
latter came I almost felt it a disturbance, and wished rather it had
still held aloof.
One day a letter was received of which the contents evidently caused
Mrs. Bretton surprise and some concern. I thought at first it was from
home, and trembled, expecting I know not what disastrous
communication: to me, however, no reference was made, and the cloud
seemed to pass.
The next day, on my return from a long walk, I found, as I entered my
bedroom, an unexpected change. In, addition to my own French bed in
its shady recess, appeared in a corner a small crib, draped with
white; and in addition to my mahogany chest of drawers, I saw a tiny
rosewood chest. I stood still, gazed, and considered.
"Of what are these things the signs and tokens?" I asked. The answer
was obvious. "A second guest is coming: Mrs. Bretton expects other
visitors."
On descending to dinner, explanations ensued. A little girl, I was
told, would shortly be my companion: the daughter of a friend and
distant relation of the late Dr. Bretton's. This little girl, it was
added, had recently lost her mother; though, indeed, Mrs. Bretton ere
long subjoined, the loss was not so great as might at first appear.
Mrs. Home (Home it seems was the name) had been a very pretty, but a
giddy, careless woman, who had neglected her child, and disappointed
and disheartened her husband. So far from congenial had the union
proved, that separation at last ensued--separation by mutual consent,
not after any legal process. Soon after this event, the lady having
over-exerted herself at a ball, caught cold, took a fever, and died
after a very brief illness. Her husband, naturally a man of very
sensitive feelings, and shocked inexpressibly by too sudden
communication of the news, could hardly, it seems, now be persuaded
but that some over-severity on his part--some deficiency in patience
and indulgence--had contributed to hasten her end. He had brooded over
this idea till his spirits were seriously affected; the medical men
insisted on travelling being tried as a remedy, and meanwhile Mrs.
Bretton had offered to take charge of his little girl. "And I hope,"
added my godmother in conclusion, "the child will not be like her
mamma; as silly and frivolous a little flirt as ever sensible man was
weak enough to marry. For," said she, "Mr. Home _is_ a sensible
man in his way, though not very practical: he is fond of science, and
lives half his life in a laboratory trying experiments--a thing his
butterfly wife could neither comprehend nor endure; and indeed"
confessed my godmother, "I should not have liked it myself."
In answer to a question of mine, she further informed me that her late
husband used to say, Mr. Home had derived this scientific turn from a
maternal uncle, a French savant; for he came, it seems; of mixed
French and Scottish origin, and had connections now living in France,
of whom more than one wrote _de_ before his name, and called
himself noble.
That same