poignant relish of envy; he feared that I too should one day make a
successful tradesman. Had I been in anything inferior to him, he would
not have hated me so thoroughly, but I knew all that he knew, and, what
was worse, he suspected that I kept the padlock of silence on mental
wealth in which he was no sharer. If he could have once placed me in a
ridiculous or mortifying position, he would have forgiven me much, but I
was guarded by three faculties--Caution, Tact, Observation; and
prowling and prying as was Edward's malignity, it could never baffle
the lynx-eyes of these, my natural sentinels. Day by day did his malice
watch my tact, hoping it would sleep, and prepared to steal snake-like
on its slumber; but tact, if it be genuine, never sleeps.
I had received my first quarter's wages, and was returning to my
lodgings, possessed heart and soul with the pleasant feeling that
the master who had paid me grudged every penny of that hard-earned
pittance--(I had long ceased to regard Mr. Crimsworth as my brother--he
was a hard, grinding master; he wished to be an inexorable tyrant: that
was all). Thoughts, not varied but strong, occupied my mind; two voices
spoke within me; again and again they uttered the same monotonous
phrases. One said: "William, your life is intolerable." The other: "What
can you do to alter it?" I walked fast, for it was a cold, frosty night
in January; as I approached my lodgings, I turned from a general view of
my affairs to the particular speculation as to whether my fire would be
out; looking towards the window of my sitting-room, I saw no cheering
red gleam.
"That slut of a servant has neglected it as usual," said I, "and I shall
see nothing but pale ashes if I go in; it is a fine starlight night--I
will walk a little farther."
It WAS a fine night, and the streets were dry and even clean for X----;
there was a crescent curve of moonlight to be seen by the parish church
tower, and hundreds of stars shone keenly bright in all quarters of the
sky.
Unconsciously I steered my course towards the country; I had got into
Grove-street, and began to feel the pleasure of seeing dim trees at the
extremity, round a suburban house, when a person leaning over the iron
gate of one of the small gardens which front the neat dwelling-houses in
this street, addressed me as I was hurrying with quick stride past.
"What the deuce is the hurry? Just so must Lot have left Sodom, when he
expected fire to pour down upon it, out of burning brass clouds."
I stopped short, and looked towards the speaker. I smelt the fragrance,
and saw the red spark of a cigar; the dusk outline of a man, too, bent
towards me over the wicket.
"You see I am meditating in the field at eventide," continued this
shade. "God knows it's cool work! especially as instead of Rebecca on
a camel's hump, with bracelets on her arms and a ring in her nose, Fate
sends me only a counting-house clerk, in a grey tweed wrapper." The
voice was familiar to me--its second utterance enabled me to seize the
speaker's identity.
"Mr. Hunsden! good evening."
"Good evening, indeed! yes, but you would have passed me without
recognition if I had not been so civil as to speak first."
"I did not know you."
"A famous excuse! You ought to have known me; I knew you, though you
were going ahead like a steam-engine. Are the police after you?"
"It wouldn't be worth their while; I'm not of consequence enough to
attract them.
"Alas, poor shepherd! Alack and well-a-day! What a theme for regret, and
how down in the mouth you must be, judging from the sound of your voice!
But since you're not running from the police, from whom are you running?
the devil?"
"On the contrary, I am going post to him."
"That is well--you're just in luck: this is Tuesday evening; there are
scores of market gigs and carts returning to Dinneford to-night; and he,
or some of his, have a seat in all regularly; so, if you'll step in
and sit half-an-hour in my bachelor's parlour, you may catch him as he
passes without much trouble. I think though you'd better let him alone
to-night, he'll have so many customers to serve; Tuesday is his busy day
in X---- and Dinneford; come in at all events."
He swung the wicket open as he spoke.
"Do you really wish me to go in?" I asked.
"As you please--I'm alone; your company for an hour or two would be
agreeable to me; but, if you don't choose to favour me so far, I'll not
press the point. I hate to bore any one."
It suited me to accept the invitation as it suited Hunsden to give it.
I passed through the gate, and followed him to the front door, which he
opened; thence we traversed a passage, and entered his parlour; the door
being shut, he pointed me to an arm-chair by the hearth; I sat down, and
glanced round me.
It was a comfortable room, at once snug and handsome; the bright grate
was filled with a genuine ----shire fire, red, clear, and generous, no
penurious South-of-England embers heaped in the corner of a grate. On
the table a shaded lamp diffused around a soft, pleasant, and equal
light; the furniture was almost luxurious for a young bachelor,
comprising a couch and two very easy chairs; bookshelves filled the
recesses on each side of the mantelpiece; they were well-furnished, and
arranged with perfect order. The neatness of the room suited my taste;
I hate irregular and slovenly habits. From what I saw I concluded that
Hunsden's ideas on that point corresponded with my own. While he removed
from the centre-table to the side-board a few pamphlets and periodicals,
I ran my eye along the shelves of the book-case nearest me. French and
German works predominated, the old French dramatists, sundry modern
authors, Thiers, Villemain, Paul de Kock, George Sand, Eugene Sue; in
German--Goethe, Schiller, Zschokke, Jean Paul Richter; in English there
were works on Political Economy. I examined no further, for Mr. Hunsden
himself recalled my attention.
"You shall have something," said he, "for you ought to feel disposed for
refreshment after walking nobody knows how far on such a Canadian night
as this; but it shall not be brandy-and-water, and it shall not