away by her friends,
left it unanswered. I presumed Villette to be her residence--to
Villette I would go. The distance was forty miles. I knew I was
catching at straws; but in the wide and weltering deep where I found
myself, I would have caught at cobwebs. Having inquired about the
means of travelling to Villette, and secured a seat in the diligence,
I departed on the strength of this outline--this shadow of a project.
Before you pronounce on the rashness of the proceeding, reader, look
back to the point whence I started; consider the desert I had left,
note how little I perilled: mine was the game where the player cannot
lose and may win.
Of an artistic temperament, I deny that I am; yet I must possess
something of the artist's faculty of making the most of present
pleasure: that is to say, when it is of the kind to my taste. I
enjoyed that day, though we travelled slowly, though it was cold,
though it rained. Somewhat bare, flat, and treeless was the route
along which our journey lay; and slimy canals crept, like half-torpid
green snakes, beside the road; and formal pollard willows edged level
fields, tilled like kitchen-garden beds. The sky, too, was
monotonously gray; the atmosphere was stagnant and humid; yet amidst
all these deadening influences, my fancy budded fresh and my heart
basked in sunshine. These feelings, however, were well kept in check
by the secret but ceaseless consciousness of anxiety lying in wait on
enjoyment, like a tiger crouched in a jungle. The breathing of that
beast of prey was in my ear always; his fierce heart panted close
against mine; he never stirred in his lair but I felt him: I knew he
waited only for sun-down to bound ravenous from his ambush.
I had hoped we might reach Villette ere night set in, and that thus I
might escape the deeper embarrassment which obscurity seems to throw
round a first arrival at an unknown bourne; but, what with our slow
progress and long stoppages--what with a thick fog and small, dense
rain--darkness, that might almost be felt, had settled on the city by
the time we gained its suburbs.
I know we passed through a gate where soldiers were stationed--so much
I could see by lamplight; then, having left behind us the miry
Chaussee, we rattled over a pavement of strangely rough and flinty
surface. At a bureau, the diligence stopped, and the passengers
alighted. My first business was to get my trunk; a small matter
enough, but important to me. Understanding that it was best not to be
importunate or over-eager about luggage, but to wait and watch quietly
the delivery of other boxes till I saw my own, and then promptly claim
and secure it, I stood apart; my eye fixed on that part of the vehicle
in which I had seen my little portmanteau safely stowed, and upon
which piles of additional bags and boxes were now heaped. One by one,
I saw these removed, lowered, and seized on.
I was sure mine ought to be by this time visible: it was not. I had
tied on the direction-card with a piece of green ribbon, that I might
know it at a glance: not a fringe or fragment of green was
perceptible. Every package was removed; every tin-case and brown-paper
parcel; the oilcloth cover was lifted; I saw with distinct vision that
not an umbrella, cloak, cane, hat-box or band-box remained.
And my portmanteau, with my few clothes and little pocket-book
enclasping the remnant of my fifteen pounds, where were they?
I ask this question now, but I could not ask it then. I could say nothing
whatever; not possessing a phrase of _speaking_ French: and it was
French, and French only, the whole world seemed now gabbling around
me. _What_ should I do? Approaching the conductor, I just laid my
hand on his arm, pointed to a trunk, thence to the diligence-roof, and
tried to express a question with my eyes. He misunderstood me, seized
the trunk indicated, and was about to hoist it on the vehicle.
"Let that alone--will you?" said a voice in good English; then, in
correction, "Qu'est-ce que vous faites donc? Cette malle est a moi."
But I had heard the Fatherland accents; they rejoiced my heart; I
turned: "Sir," said I, appealing to the stranger, without, in my
distress, noticing what he was like, "I cannot speak French. May I
entreat you to ask this man what he has done with my trunk?"
Without discriminating, for the moment, what sort of face it was to
which my eyes were raised and on which they were fixed, I felt in its
expression half-surprise at my appeal and half-doubt of the wisdom of
interference.
"_Do_ ask him; I would do as much for you," said I.
I don't know whether he smiled, but he said in a gentlemanly tone--
that is to say, a tone not hard nor terrifying,--"What sort of trunk
was yours?"
I described it, including in my description the green ribbon. And
forthwith he took the conductor under hand, and I felt, through all
the storm of French which followed, that he raked him fore and aft.
Presently he returned to me.
"The fellow avers he was overloaded, and confesses that he removed
your trunk after you saw it put on, and has left it behind at Boue-
Marine with other parcels; he has promised, however, to forward it
to-morrow; the day after, therefore, you will find it safe at this
bureau."
"Thank you," said I: but my heart sank.
Meantime what should I do? Perhaps this English gentleman saw the
failure of courage in my face; he inquired kindly, "Have you any
friends in this city?"
"No, and I don't know where to go."
There was a little pause, in the course of which, as he turned more
fully to the light of a lamp above him, I saw that he was a young,
distinguished, and handsome man; he might be a lord, for anything I
knew: nature had made him good enough for a prince, I thought. His
face was very pleasant; he looked high but not arrogant, manly but not
overbearing. I was turning away, in the deep consciousness of all
absence of claim to look for further help from such a one as he.
"Was all your money in your trunk?" he asked, stopping me.
How thankful was I to be able to answer with truth--"No. I have enough
in my purse" (for