erected his tall form, reared his head,
before a little declined, and putting back his hair from his broad Saxon
forehead, showed unshaded the gleam of almost savage satire which his
interlocutor's tone of eagerness and look of ardour had sufficed at
once to kindle in his soul and elicit from his eyes: he was himself;
as Frances was herself, and in none but his own language would he now
address her.
"You understand English?" was the prefatory question.
"A little."
"Well, then, you shall have plenty of it; and first, I see you've not
much more sense than some others of my acquaintance" (indicating me
with his thumb), "or else you'd never turn rabid about that dirty little
country called England; for rabid, I see you are; I read Anglophobia in
your looks, and hear it in your words. Why, mademoiselle, is it possible
that anybody with a grain of rationality should feel enthusiasm about a
mere name, and that name England? I thought you were a lady-abbess five
minutes ago, and respected you accordingly; and now I see you are a sort
of Swiss sibyl, with high Tory and high Church principles!"
"England is your country?" asked Frances.
"Yes."
"And you don't like it?"
"I'd be sorry to like it! A little corrupt, venal, lord-and-king-cursed
nation, full of mucky pride (as they say in----shire), and helpless
pauperism; rotten with abuses, worm-eaten with prejudices!"
"You might say so of almost every state; there are abuses and prejudices
everywhere, and I thought fewer in England than in other countries."
"Come to England and see. Come to Birmingham and Manchester; come to St.
Giles' in London, and get a practical notion of how our system works.
Examine the footprints of our august aristocracy; see how they walk
in blood, crushing hearts as they go. Just put your head in at English
cottage doors; get a glimpse of Famine crouched torpid on black
hearthstones; of Disease lying bare on beds without coverlets, of
Infamy wantoning viciously with Ignorance, though indeed Luxury is her
favourite paramour, and princely halls are dearer to her than thatched
hovels----"
"I was not thinking of the wretchedness and vice in England; I was
thinking of the good side--of what is elevated in your character as a
nation."
"There is no good side--none at least of which you can have any
knowledge; for you cannot appreciate the efforts of industry, the
achievements of enterprise, or the discoveries of science: narrowness
of education and obscurity of position quite incapacitate you
from understanding these points; and as to historical and poetical
associations, I will not insult you, mademoiselle, by supposing that you
alluded to such humbug."
"But I did partly."
Hunsden laughed--his laugh of unmitigated scorn.
"I did, Mr. Hunsden. Are you of the number of those to whom such
associations give no pleasure?"
"Mademoiselle, what is an association? I never saw one. What is its
length, breadth, weight, value--ay, VALUE? What price will it bring in
the market?"
"Your portrait, to any one who loved you, would, for the sake of
association, be without price."
That inscrutable Hunsden heard this remark and felt it rather acutely,
too, somewhere; for he coloured--a thing not unusual with him, when hit
unawares on a tender point. A sort of trouble momentarily darkened
his eye, and I believe he filled up the transient pause succeeding his
antagonist's home-thrust, by a wish that some one did love him as
he would like to be loved--some one whose love he could unreservedly
return.
The lady pursued her temporary advantage.
"If your world is a world without associations, Mr. Hunsden, I no longer
wonder that you hate England so. I don't clearly know what Paradise is,
and what angels are; yet taking it to be the most glorious region I can
conceive, and angels the most elevated existences--if one of them--if
Abdiel the Faithful himself" (she was thinking of Milton) "were suddenly
stripped of the faculty of association, I think he would soon rush forth
from 'the ever-during gates,' leave heaven, and seek what he had lost in
hell. Yes, in the very hell from which he turned 'with retorted scorn.'"
Frances' tone in saying this was as marked as her language, and it
was when the word "hell" twanged off from her lips, with a somewhat
startling emphasis, that Hunsden deigned to bestow one slight glance of
admiration. He liked something strong, whether in man or woman; he liked
whatever dared to clear conventional limits. He had never before heard
a lady say "hell" with that uncompromising sort of accent, and the sound
pleased him from a lady's lips; he would fain have had Frances to strike
the string again, but it was not in her way. The display of eccentric
vigour never gave her pleasure, and it only sounded in her voice or
flashed in her countenance when extraordinary circumstances--and those
generally painful--forced it out of the depths where it burned latent.
To me, once or twice, she had in intimate conversation, uttered
venturous thoughts in nervous language; but when the hour of such
manifestation was past, I could not recall it; it came of itself and of
itself departed. Hunsden's excitations she put by soon with a smile, and
recurring to the theme of disputation, said--
"Since England is nothing, why do the continental nations respect her
so?"
"I should have thought no child would have asked that question," replied
Hunsden, who never at any time gave information without reproving for
stupidity those who asked it of him. "If you had been my pupil, as I
suppose you once had the misfortune to be that of a deplorable character
not a hundred miles off, I would have put you in the corner for such a
confession of ignorance. Why, mademoiselle, can't you see that it is
our GOLD which buys us French politeness, German good-will, and Swiss
servility?" And he sneered diabolically.
"Swiss?" said Frances, catching the word "servility." "Do you call my
countrymen servile?" and she started up. I could not suppress a low
laugh; there was ire in her glance and defiance in her attitude. "Do
you abuse Switzerland to me, Mr. Hunsden? Do you think I have no
associations? Do you calculate that I am prepared to dwell only on what
vice and degradation may be found in Alpine villages, and to leave
quite out of my heart the social greatness of my countrymen, and our
blood-earned freedom, and the natural glories of our mountains? You're
mistaken--you're mistaken."
"Social greatness? Call it what you will, your countrymen are sensible
fellows; they make a marketable article of