a man whom it made happy to see others happy; he
liked to have movement, animation, abundance and enjoyment round him.
We asked where he would sit. He told us, we knew well he was our
slave, and we his tyrants, and that he dared not so much as choose a
chair without our leave; so we set him the farmer's great chair at the
head of the long table, and put him into it.
Well might we like him, with all his passions and hurricanes, when he
could be so benignant and docile at times, as he was just now. Indeed,
at the worst, it was only his nerves that were irritable, not his
temper that was radically bad; soothe, comprehend, comfort him, and he
was a lamb; he would not harm a fly. Only to the very stupid,
perverse, or unsympathizing, was he in the slightest degree dangerous.
Mindful always of his religion, he made the youngest of the party say
a little prayer before we began breakfast, crossing himself as
devotedly as a woman. I had never seen him pray before, or make that
pious sign; he did it so simply, with such child-like faith, I could
not help smiling pleasurably as I watched; his eyes met my smile; he
just stretched out his kind hand, saying, "Donnez-moi la main! I see
we worship the same God, in the same spirit, though by different
rites."
Most of M. Emanuel's brother Professors were emancipated free-
thinkers, infidels, atheists; and many of them men whose lives would
not bear scrutiny; he was more like a knight of old, religious in his
way, and of spotless fame. Innocent childhood, beautiful youth were
safe at his side. He had vivid passions, keen feelings, but his pure
honour and his artless piety were the strong charm that kept the lions
couchant.
That breakfast was a merry meal, and the merriment was not mere vacant
clatter: M. Paul originated, led, controlled and heightened it; his
social, lively temper played unfettered and unclouded; surrounded only
by women and children there was nothing to cross and thwart him; he
had his own way, and a pleasant way it was.
The meal over, the party were free to run and play in the meadows; a
few stayed to help the farmer's wife to put away her earthenware. M.
Paul called me from among these to come out and sit near him under a
tree--whence he could view the troop gambolling, over a wide pasture--
and read to him whilst he took his cigar. He sat on a rustic bench,
and I at the tree-root. While I read (a pocket-classic--a Corneille--I
did not like it, but he did, finding therein beauties I never could be
brought to perceive), he listened with a sweetness of calm the more
impressive from the impetuosity of his general nature; the deepest
happiness filled his blue eye and smoothed his broad forehead. I, too,
was happy--happy with the bright day, happier with his presence,
happiest with his kindness.
He asked, by-and-by, if I would not rather run to my companions than
sit there? I said, no; I felt content to be where he was. He asked
whether, if I were his sister, I should always he content to stay with
a brother such as he. I said, I believed I should; and I felt it.
Again, he inquired whether, if he were to leave Villette, and go far
away, I should be sorry; and I dropped Corneille, and made no reply.
"Petite soeur," said he; "how long could you remember me if we were
separated?"
"That, Monsieur, I can never tell, because I do not know how long it
will be before I shall cease to remember everything earthly."
"If I were to go beyond seas for two--three--five years, should you
welcome me on my return?"
"Monsieur, how could I live in the interval?"
"Pourtant j'ai ete pour vous bien dur, bien exigeant."
I hid my face with the book, for it was covered with tears. I asked
him why he talked so; and he said he would talk so no more, and
cheered me again with the kindest encouragement. Still, the gentleness
with which he treated me during the rest of the day, went somehow to
my heart. It was too tender. It was mournful. I would rather he had
been abrupt, whimsical, and irate as was his wont.
When hot noon arrived--for the day turned out as we had anticipated,
glowing as June--our shepherd collected his sheep from the pasture,
and proceeded to lead us all softly home. But we had a whole league to
walk, thus far from Villette was the farm where he had breakfasted;
the children, especially, were tired with their play; the spirits of
most flagged at the prospect of this mid-day walk over chaussees
flinty, glaring, and dusty. This state of things had been foreseen and
provided for. Just beyond the boundary of the farm we met two spacious
vehicles coming to fetch us--such conveyances as are hired out
purposely for the accommodation of school-parties; here, with good
management, room was found for all, and in another hour M. Paul made
safe consignment of his charge at the Rue Fossette. It had been a
pleasant day: it would have been perfect, but for the breathing of
melancholy which had dimmed its sunshine a moment.
That tarnish was renewed the same evening.
Just about sunset, I saw M. Emanuel come out of the front-door,
accompanied by Madame Beck. They paced the centre-alley for nearly an
hour, talking earnestly: he--looking grave, yet restless; she--wearing
an amazed, expostulatory, dissuasive air.
I wondered what was under discussion; and when Madame Beck re-entered
the house as it darkened, leaving her kinsman Paul yet lingering in
the garden, I said to myself--"He called me 'petite soeur' this
morning. If he were really my brother, how I should like to go to him
just now, and ask what it is that presses on his mind. See how he
leans against that tree, with his arms crossed and his brow bent. He
wants consolation, I know: Madame does not console: she only
remonstrates. What now----?"
Starting from quiescence to action, M. Paul came striding erect and
quick down the garden. The carre doors were yet open: I thought he was
probably going to water the orange-trees in the tubs, after his
occasional custom; on reaching the court, however, he took an abrupt
turn and made for the berceau and the first-classe glass door. There,
in that first classe I