sanctuary of home. I knew how quietly and how deeply the
well bubbled in her heart; I knew how the more dangerous flame burned
safely under the eye of reason; I had seen when the fire shot up a
moment high and vivid, when the accelerated heat troubled life's current
in its channels; I had seen reason reduce the rebel, and humble its
blaze to embers. I had confidence in Frances Evans; I had respect
for her, and as I drew her arm through mine, and led her out of the
cemetery, I felt I had another sentiment, as strong as confidence, as
firm as respect, more fervid than either--that of love.
"Well, my pupil," said I, as the ominous sounding gate swung to behind
us--"Well, I have found you again: a month's search has seemed long,
and I little thought to have discovered my lost sheep straying amongst
graves."
Never had I addressed her but as "Mademoiselle" before, and to speak
thus was to take up a tone new to both her and me. Her answer suprised
me that this language ruffled none of her feelings, woke no discord in
her heart:
"Mon maitre," she said, "have you troubled yourself to seek me? I little
imagined you would think much of my absence, but I grieved bitterly to
be taken away from you. I was sorry for that circumstance when heavier
troubles ought to have made me forget it."
"Your aunt is dead?"
"Yes, a fortnight since, and she died full of regret, which I could not
chase from her mind; she kept repeating, even during the last night
of her existence, 'Frances, you will be so lonely when I am gone,
so friendless:' she wished too that she could have been buried in
Switzerland, and it was I who persuaded her in her old age to leave the
banks of Lake Leman, and to come, only as it seems to die, in this flat
region of Flanders. Willingly would I have observed her last wish, and
taken her remains back to our own country, but that was impossible; I
was forced to lay her here."
"She was ill but a short time, I presume?"
"But three weeks. When she began to sink I asked Mdlle. Reuter's leave
to stay with her and wait on her; I readily got leave."
"Do you return to the pensionnat!" I demanded hastily.
"Monsieur, when I had been at home a week Mdlle. Reuter called one
evening, just after I had got my aunt to bed; she went into her room
to speak to her, and was extremely civil and affable, as she always is;
afterwards she came and sat with me a long time, and just as she rose to
go away, she said: "Mademoiselle, I shall not soon cease to regret your
departure from my establishment, though indeed it is true that you have
taught your class of pupils so well that they are all quite accomplished
in the little works you manage so skilfully, and have not the slightest
need of further instruction; my second teacher must in future supply
your place, with regard to the younger pupils, as well as she can,
though she is indeed an inferior artiste to you, and doubtless it will
be your part now to assume a higher position in your calling; I am sure
you will everywhere find schools and families willing to profit by your
talents.' And then she paid me my last quarter's salary. I asked, as
mademoiselle would no doubt think, very bluntly, if she designed to
discharge me from the establishment. She smiled at my inelegance of
speech, and answered that 'our connection as employer and employed was
certainly dissolved, but that she hoped still to retain the pleasure of
my acquaintance; she should always be happy to see me as a friend;' and
then she said something about the excellent condition of the streets,
and the long continuance of fine weather, and went away quite cheerful."
I laughed inwardly; all this was so like the directress--so like what I
had expected and guessed of her conduct; and then the exposure and proof
of her lie, unconsciously afforded by Frances:--"She had frequently
applied for Mdlle. Henri's address," forsooth; "Mdlle. Henri had always
evaded giving it," &c., &c., and here I found her a visitor at the very
house of whose locality she had professed absolute ignorance!
Any comments I might have intended to make on my pupil's communication,
were checked by the plashing of large rain-drops on our faces and on the
path, and by the muttering of a distant but coming storm. The warning
obvious in stagnant air and leaden sky had already induced me to take
the road leading back to Brussels, and now I hastened my own steps and
those of my companion, and, as our way lay downhill, we got on rapidly.
There was an interval after the fall of the first broad drops before
heavy rain came on; in the meantime we had passed through the Porte de
Louvain, and were again in the city.
"Where do you live?" I asked; "I will see you safe home."
"Rue Notre Dame aux Neiges," answered Frances.
It was not far from the Rue de Louvain, and we stood on the doorsteps
of the house we sought ere the clouds, severing with loud peal and
shattered cataract of lightning, emptied their livid folds in a torrent,
heavy, prone, and broad.
"Come in! come in!" said Frances, as, after putting her into the house,
I paused ere I followed: the word decided me; I stepped across the
threshold, shut the door on the rushing, flashing, whitening storm, and
followed her upstairs to her apartments. Neither she nor I were wet; a
projection over the door had warded off the straight-descending flood;
none but the first, large drops had touched our garments; one minute
more and we should not have had a dry thread on us.
Stepping over a little mat of green wool, I found myself in a small room
with a painted floor and a square of green carpet in the middle; the
articles of furniture were few, but all bright and exquisitely clean;
order reigned through its narrow limits--such order as it soothed my
punctilious soul to behold. And I had hesitated to enter the abode,
because I apprehended after all that Mdlle. Reuter's hint about its
extreme poverty might be too well-founded, and I feared to embarrass the
lace-mender by entering her lodgings unawares! Poor the