the reply.
"No, no, we'll none of her: she shall not haunt you, Lucy. Give her
that shake of the hand, if she comes again. Will she stand
_that_, do you think?"
I thought it too kind and cordial for a ghost to stand: and so was the
smile which matched it, and accompanied his "Good-night."
* * * * *
And had there been anything in the garret? What did they discover? I
believe, on the closest examination, their discoveries amounted to
very little. They talked, at first, of the cloaks being disturbed; but
Madame Beck told me afterwards she thought they hung much as usual:
and as for the broken pane in the skylight, she affirmed that aperture
was rarely without one or more panes broken or cracked: and besides, a
heavy hail-storm had fallen a few days ago. Madame questioned me very
closely as to what I had seen, but I only described an obscure figure
clothed in black: I took care not to breathe the word "nun," certain
that this word would at once suggest to her mind an idea of romance
and unreality. She charged me to say nothing on the subject to any
servant, pupil, or teacher, and highly commended my discretion in
coming to her private salle-a-manger, instead of carrying the tale of
horror to the school refectory. Thus the subject dropped. I was left
secretly and sadly to wonder, in my own mind, whether that strange
thing was of this world, or of a realm beyond the grave; or whether
indeed it was only the child of malady, and I of that malady the prey.
CHAPTER XXIII.
VASHTI.
To wonder sadly, did I say? No: a new influence began to act upon my
life, and sadness, for a certain space, was held at bay. Conceive a
dell, deep-hollowed in forest secresy; it lies in dimness and mist:
its turf is dank, its herbage pale and humid. A storm or an axe makes
a wide gap amongst the oak-trees; the breeze sweeps in; the sun looks
down; the sad, cold dell becomes a deep cup of lustre; high summer
pours her blue glory and her golden light out of that beauteous sky,
which till now the starved hollow never saw.
A new creed became mine--a belief in happiness.
It was three weeks since the adventure of the garret, and I possessed
in that case, box, drawer up-stairs, casketed with that first letter,
four companions like to it, traced by the same firm pen, sealed with
the same clear seal, full of the same vital comfort. Vital comfort it
seemed to me then: I read them in after years; they were kind letters
enough--pleasing letters, because composed by one well pleased; in the
two last there were three or four closing lines half-gay, half-tender,
"by _feeling_ touched, but not subdued." Time, dear reader,
mellowed them to a beverage of this mild quality; but when I first
tasted their elixir, fresh from the fount so honoured, it seemed juice
of a divine vintage: a draught which Hebe might fill, and the very
gods approve.
Does the reader, remembering what was said some pages back, care to
ask how I answered these letters: whether under the dry, stinting
check of Reason, or according to the full, liberal impulse of Feeling?
To speak truth, I compromised matters; I served two masters: I bowed
down in the houses of Rimmon, and lifted the heart at another shrine.
I wrote to these letters two answers--one for my own relief, the other
for Graham's perusal.
To begin with: Feeling and I turned Reason out of doors, drew against
her bar and bolt, then we sat down, spread our paper, dipped in the
ink an eager pen, and, with deep enjoyment, poured out our sincere
heart. When we had done--when two sheets were covered with the
language of a strongly-adherent affection, a rooted and active
gratitude--(once, for all, in this parenthesis, I disclaim, with the
utmost scorn, every sneaking suspicion of what are called "warmer
feelings:" women do not entertain these "warmer feelings" where, from
the commencement, through the whole progress of an acquaintance, they
have never once been cheated of the conviction that, to do so would be
to commit a mortal absurdity: nobody ever launches into Love unless he
has seen or dreamed the rising of Hope's star over Love's troubled
waters)--when, then, I had given expression to a closely-clinging and
deeply-honouring attachment--an attachment that wanted to attract to
itself and take to its own lot all that was painful in the destiny of
its object; that would, if it could, have absorbed and conducted away
all storms and lightnings from an existence viewed with a passion of
solicitude--then, just at that moment, the doors of my heart would
shake, bolt and bar would yield, Reason would leap in vigorous and
revengeful, snatch the full sheets, read, sneer, erase, tear up,
re-write, fold, seal, direct, and send a terse, curt missive of a page.
She did right.
I did not live on letters only: I was visited, I was looked after;
once a week I was taken out to La Terrasse; always I was made much of.
Dr. Bretton failed not to tell me _why_ he was so kind: "To keep
away the nun," he said; "he was determined to dispute with her her
prey. He had taken," he declared, "a thorough dislike to her, chiefly
on account of that white face-cloth, and those cold grey eyes: the
moment he heard of those odious particulars," he affirmed, "consummate
disgust had incited him to oppose her; he was determined to try
whether he or she was the cleverest, and he only wished she would once
more look in upon me when he was present:" but _that_ she never
did. In short, he regarded me scientifically in the light of a
patient, and at once exercised his professional skill, and gratified
his natural benevolence, by a course of cordial and attentive
treatment.
One evening, the first in December, I was walking by myself in the
carre; it was six o'clock; the classe-doors were closed; but within,
the pupils, rampant in the licence of evening recreation, were
counterfeiting a miniature chaos. The carre was quite dark, except a
red light shining under and about the stove; the wide glass-doors and
the long windows were frosted over; a crystal sparkle of starlight,
here and there spangling this blanched winter veil, and breaking with
scattered brilliance the paleness of its embroidery, proved it a clear
night, though moonless. That I should dare