were unprepared? You
would willingly have laid out a few centimes on a flower to give me
pleasure, had you been aware that it was expected? Say so, and all is
forgotten, and the pain soothed."
"I did know that it was expected: I _was_ prepared; yet I laid
out no centimes on flowers."
"It is well--you do right to be honest. I should almost have hated you
had you flattered and lied. Better declare at once 'Paul Carl Emanuel
--je te deteste, mon garcon!'--than smile an interest, look an
affection, and be false and cold at heart. False and cold I don't
think you are; but you have made a great mistake in life, that I
believe; I think your judgment is warped--that you are indifferent
where you ought to be grateful--and perhaps devoted and infatuated,
where you ought to be cool as your name. Don't suppose that I wish you
to have a passion for me, Mademoiselle; Dieu vous en garde! What do
you start for? Because I said passion? Well, I say it again. There is
such a word, and there is such a thing--though not within these walls,
thank heaven! You are no child that one should not speak of what
exists; but I only uttered the word--the thing, I assure you, is alien
to my whole life and views. It died in the past--in the present it
lies buried--its grave is deep-dug, well-heaped, and many winters old:
in the future there will be a resurrection, as I believe to my souls
consolation; but all will then be changed--form and feeling: the
mortal will have put on immortality--it will rise, not for earth, but
heaven. All I say to _you_, Miss Lucy Snowe, is--that you ought
to treat Professor Paul Emanuel decently."
I could not, and did not contradict such a sentiment.
"Tell me," he pursued, "when it is _your_ fete-day, and I will
not grudge a few centimes for a small offering."
"You will be like me, Monsieur: this cost more than a few centimes,
and I did not grudge its price."
And taking from the open desk the little box, I put it into his hand.
"It lay ready in my lap this morning," I continued; "and if Monsieur
had been rather more patient, and Mademoiselle St. Pierre less
interfering--perhaps I should say, too, if _I_ had been calmer
and wiser--I should have given it then."
He looked at the box: I saw its clear warm tint and bright azure
circlet, pleased his eyes. I told him to open it.
"My initials!" said he, indicating the letters in the lid. "Who told
you I was called Carl David?"
"A little bird, Monsieur."
"Does it fly from me to you? Then one can tie a message under its wing
when needful.",
He took out the chain--a trifle indeed as to value, but glossy with
silk and sparkling with beads. He liked that too--admired it
artlessly, like a child.
"For me?"
"Yes, for you."
"This is the thing you were working at last night?"
"The same."
"You finished it this morning?"
"I did."
"You commenced it with the intention that it should be mine?"
"Undoubtedly."
"And offered on my fete-day?"
"Yes."
"This purpose continued as you wove it?"
Again I assented.
"Then it is not necessary that I should cut out any portion--saying,
this part is not mine: it was plaited under the idea and for the
adornment of another?"
"By no means. It is neither necessary, nor would it be just."
"This object is _all_ mine?"
"That object is yours entirely."
Straightway Monsieur opened his paletot, arranged the guard splendidly
across his chest, displaying as much and suppressing as little as he
could: for he had no notion of concealing what he admired and thought
decorative. As to the box, he pronounced it a superb bonbonniere--he
was fond of bonbons, by the way--and as he always liked to share with
others what pleased himself, he would give his "dragees" as freely as
he lent his books. Amongst the kind brownie's gifts left in my desk, I
forgot to enumerate many a paper of chocolate comfits. His tastes in
these matters were southern, and what we think infantine. His simple
lunch consisted frequently of a "brioche," which, as often as not, to
shared with some child of the third division.
"A present c'est un fait accompli," said he, re-adjusting his paletot;
and we had no more words on the subject. After looking over the two
volumes he had brought, and cutting away some pages with his penknife
(he generally pruned before lending his books, especially if they were
novels, and sometimes I was a little provoked at the severity of his
censorship, the retrenchments interrupting the narrative), he rose,
politely touched his bonnet-grec, and bade me a civil good-day.
"We are friends now," thought I, "till the next time we quarrel."
We _might_ have quarrelled again that very same evening, but,
wonderful to relate, failed, for once, to make the most of our
opportunity.
Contrary to all expectation, M. Paul arrived at the study-hour. Having
seen so much of him in the morning, we did not look for his presence
at night. No sooner were we seated at lessons, however, than he
appeared. I own I was glad to see him, so glad that I could not help
greeting his arrival with a smile; and when he made his way to the
same seat about which so serious a misunderstanding had formerly
arisen, I took good care not to make too much room for him; he watched
with a jealous, side-long look, to see whether I shrank away, but I
did not, though the bench was a little crowded. I was losing the early
impulse to recoil from M. Paul. Habituated to the paletot and bonnet-
grec, the neighbourhood of these garments seemed no longer
uncomfortable or very formidable. I did not now sit restrained,
"asphyxiee" (as he used to say) at his side; I stirred when I wished
to stir, coughed when it was necessary, even yawned when I was tired--
did, in short, what I pleased, blindly reliant upon his indulgence.
Nor did my temerity, this evening at least, meet the punishment it
perhaps merited; he was both indulgent and good-natured; not a cross
glance shot from his eyes, not a hasty word left his lips. Till the
very close of the evening, he did not indeed address me at all, yet I
felt, somehow, that he was full of friendliness. Silence is of
different kinds, and breathes different meanings; no words could
inspire a pleasanter content than did M. Paul's