over them--so--and compelled her shame, her
pride, her shyness, all to yield to a little bit of determined Will--now
where is she? How can I get at her?"
Opening my chamber door I walked down into the kitchen.
"Who brought the packet?" I asked of the servant who had delivered it to
me.
"Un petit commissionaire, monsieur."
"Did he say anything?"
"Rien."
And I wended my way up the back-stairs, wondrously the wiser for my
inquiries.
"No matter," said I to myself, as I again closed the door. "No
matter--I'll seek her through Brussels."
And I did. I sought her day by day whenever I had a moment's leisure,
for four weeks; I sought her on Sundays all day long; I sought her on
the Boulevards, in the Allee Verte, in the Park; I sought her in Ste.
Gudule and St. Jacques; I sought her in the two Protestant chapels; I
attended these latter at the German, French, and English services, not
doubting that I should meet her at one of them. All my researches were
absolutely fruitless; my security on the last point was proved by the
event to be equally groundless with my other calculations. I stood
at the door of each chapel after the service, and waited till every
individual had come out, scrutinizing every gown draping a slender form,
peering under every bonnet covering a young head. In vain; I saw
girlish figures pass me, drawing their black scarfs over their sloping
shoulders, but none of them had the exact turn and air of Mdlle.
Henri's; I saw pale and thoughtful faces "encadrees" in bands of brown
hair, but I never found her forehead, her eyes, her eyebrows. All the
features of all the faces I met seemed frittered away, because my eye
failed to recognize the peculiarities it was bent upon; an ample space
of brow and a large, dark, and serious eye, with a fine but decided line
of eyebrow traced above.
"She has probably left Brussels--perhaps is gone to England, as she
said she would," muttered I inwardly, as on the afternoon of the fourth
Sunday, I turned from the door of the chapel-royal which the door-keeper
had just closed and locked, and followed in the wake of the last of the
congregation, now dispersed and dispersing over the square. I had
soon outwalked the couples of English gentlemen and ladies. (Gracious
goodness! why don't they dress better? My eye is yet filled with visions
of the high-flounced, slovenly, and tumbled dresses in costly silk and
satin, of the large unbecoming collars in expensive lace; of the ill-cut
coats and strangely fashioned pantaloons which every Sunday, at the
English service, filled the choirs of the chapel-royal, and after it,
issuing forth into the square, came into disadvantageous contrast with
freshly and trimly attired foreign figures, hastening to attend salut
at the church of Coburg.) I had passed these pairs of Britons, and
the groups of pretty British children, and the British footmen and
waiting-maids; I had crossed the Place Royale, and got into the Rue
Royale, thence I had diverged into the Rue de Louvain--an old and quiet
street. I remember that, feeling a little hungry, and not desiring to
go back and take my share of the "gouter," now on the refectory-table
at Pelet's--to wit, pistolets and water--I stepped into a baker's and
refreshed myself on a COUC(?)--it is a Flemish word, I don't know how
to spell it--A CORINTHE-ANGLICE, a currant bun--and a cup of coffee; and
then I strolled on towards the Porte de Louvain. Very soon I was out of
the city, and slowly mounting the hill, which ascends from the gate, I
took my time; for the afternoon, though cloudy, was very sultry, and not
a breeze stirred to refresh the atmosphere. No inhabitant of Brussels
need wander far to search for solitude; let him but move half a league
from his own city and he will find her brooding still and blank over
the wide fields, so drear though so fertile, spread out treeless and
trackless round the capital of Brabant. Having gained the summit of the
hill, and having stood and looked long over the cultured but lifeless
campaign, I felt a wish to quit the high road, which I had hitherto
followed, and get in among those tilled grounds--fertile as the beds
of a Brobdignagian kitchen-garden--spreading far and wide even to the
boundaries of the horizon, where, from a dusk green, distance changed
them to a sullen blue, and confused their tints with those of the livid
and thunderous-looking sky. Accordingly I turned up a by-path to the
right; I had not followed it far ere it brought me, as I expected, into
the fields, amidst which, just before me, stretched a long and lofty
white wall enclosing, as it seemed from the foliage showing above, some
thickly planted nursery of yew and cypress, for of that species were
the branches resting on the pale parapets, and crowding gloomily about a
massive cross, planted doubtless on a central eminence and extending its
arms, which seemed of black marble, over the summits of those sinister
trees. I approached, wondering to what house this well-protected garden
appertained; I turned the angle of the wall, thinking to see some
stately residence; I was close upon great iron gates; there was a
hut serving for a lodge near, but I had no occasion to apply for the
key--the gates were open; I pushed one leaf back--rain had rusted
its hinges, for it groaned dolefully as they revolved. Thick planting
embowered the entrance. Passing up the avenue, I saw objects on
each hand which, in their own mute language of inscription and sign,
explained clearly to what abode I had made my way. This was the
house appointed for all living; crosses, monuments, and garlands of
everlastings announced, "The Protestant Cemetery, outside the gate of
Louvain."
The place was large enough to afford half an hour's strolling without
the monotony of treading continually the same path; and, for those who
love to peruse the annals of graveyards, here was variety of inscription
enough to occupy the attention for double or treble that space of time.
Hither people of many kindreds, tongues, and nations, had brought their
dead for interment; and here, on pages of stone, of marble, and of
brass, were written names, dates, last tributes of pomp or love, in
English, in French, in German, and Latin. Here the Englishman had
erected a marble monument over the remains of his Mary Smith or Jane
Brown, and