inscribed it only with her name. There the French widower had
shaded the grave: of his Elmire or Celestine with a brilliant thicket
of roses, amidst which a little tablet rising, bore an equally bright
testimony to her countless virtues. Every nation, tribe, and kindred,
mourned after its own fashion; and how soundless was the mourning of
all! My own tread, though slow and upon smooth-rolled paths, seemed to
startle, because it formed the sole break to a silence otherwise total.
Not only the winds, but the very fitful, wandering airs, were that
afternoon, as by common consent, all fallen asleep in their various
quarters; the north was hushed, the south silent, the east sobbed not,
nor did the west whisper. The clouds in heaven were condensed and
dull, but apparently quite motionless. Under the trees of this cemetery
nestled a warm breathless gloom, out of which the cypresses stood up
straight and mute, above which the willows hung low and still; where
the flowers, as languid as fair, waited listless for night dew or
thunder-shower; where the tombs, and those they hid, lay impassible to
sun or shadow, to rain or drought.
Importuned by the sound of my own footsteps, I turned off upon the turf,
and slowly advanced to a grove of yews; I saw something stir among the
stems; I thought it might be a broken branch swinging, my short-sighted
vision had caught no form, only a sense of motion; but the dusky shade
passed on, appearing and disappearing at the openings in the avenue. I
soon discerned it was a living thing, and a human thing; and, drawing
nearer, I perceived it was a woman, pacing slowly to and fro, and
evidently deeming herself alone as I had deemed myself alone, and
meditating as I had been meditating. Ere long she returned to a seat
which I fancy she had but just quitted, or I should have caught sight
of her before. It was in a nook, screened by a clump of trees; there was
the white wall before her, and a little stone set up against the wall,
and, at the foot of the stone, was an allotment of turf freshly turned
up, a new-made grave. I put on my spectacles, and passed softly close
behind her; glancing at the inscription on the stone, I read," Julienne
Henri, died at Brussels, aged sixty. August 10th, 18--." Having perused
the inscription, I looked down at the form sitting bent and thoughtful
just under my eyes, unconscious of the vicinity of any living thing; it
was a slim, youthful figure in mourning apparel of the plainest black
stuff, with a little simple, black crape bonnet; I felt, as well as
saw, who it was; and, moving neither hand nor foot, I stood some moments
enjoying the security of conviction. I had sought her for a month, and
had never discovered one of her traces--never met a hope, or seized
a chance of encountering her anywhere. I had been forced to loosen my
grasp on expectation; and, but an hour ago, had sunk slackly under
the discouraging thought that the current of life, and the impulse
of destiny, had swept her for ever from my reach; and, behold, while
bending suddenly earthward beneath the pressure of despondency--while
following with my eyes the track of sorrow on the turf of a
graveyard--here was my lost jewel dropped on the tear-fed herbage,
nestling in the messy and mouldy roots of yew-trees.
Frances sat very quiet, her elbow on her knee, and her head on her hand.
I knew she could retain a thinking attitude a long time without change;
at last, a tear fell; she had been looking at the name on the
stone before her, and her heart had no doubt endured one of those
constrictions with which the desolate living, regretting the dead, are,
at times, so sorely oppressed. Many tears rolled down, which she wiped
away, again and again, with her handkerchief; some distressed sobs
escaped her, and then, the paroxysm over, she sat quiet as before. I put
my hand gently on her shoulder; no need further to prepare her, for
she was neither hysterical nor liable to fainting-fits; a sudden push,
indeed, might have startled her, but the contact of my quiet touch
merely woke attention as I wished; and, though she turned quickly, yet
so lightning-swift is thought--in some minds especially--I believe the
wonder of what--the consciousness of who it was that thus stole unawares
on her solitude, had passed through her brain, and flashed into her
heart, even before she had effected that hasty movement; at least,
Amazement had hardly opened her eyes and raised them to mine, ere
Recognition informed their irids with most speaking brightness. Nervous
surprise had hardly discomposed her features ere a sentiment of most
vivid joy shone clear and warm on her whole countenance. I had hardly
time to observe that she was wasted and pale, ere called to feel a
responsive inward pleasure by the sense of most full and exquisite
pleasure glowing in the animated flush, and shining in the expansive
light, now diffused over my pupil's face. It was the summer sun flashing
out after the heavy summer shower; and what fertilizes more rapidly than
that beam, burning almost like fire in its ardour?
I hate boldness--that boldness which is of the brassy brow and insensate
nerves; but I love the courage of the strong heart, the fervour of the
generous blood; I loved with passion the light of Frances Evans' clear
hazel eye when it did not fear to look straight into mine; I loved the
tones with which she uttered the words--
"Mon maitre! mon maitre!"
I loved the movement with which she confided her hand to my hand; I
loved her as she stood there, penniless and parentless; for a sensualist
charmless, for me a treasure--my best object of sympathy on earth,
thinking such thoughts as I thought, feeling such feelings as I felt; my
ideal of the shrine in which to seal my stores of love; personification
of discretion and forethought, of diligence and perseverance, of
self-denial and self-control--those guardians, those trusty keepers of
the gift I longed to confer on her--the gift of all my affections;
model of truth and honour, of independence and conscientiousness--those
refiners and sustainers of an honest life; silent possessor of a well
of tenderness, of a flame, as genial as still, as pure as quenchless,
of natural feeling, natural passion--those sources of refreshment and
comfort to the