but she seemed a child."
"She is about eighteen," I repeated. "She is grown up; she will be no
taller."
"My little jewel!" said M. de Bassompierre, in a tone which penetrated
like some of his daughter's accents.
He sat very thoughtful.
"Sir, don't grieve," I said; for I knew his feelings, utterly unspoken
as they were.
"She is the only pearl I have," he said; "and now others will find out
that she is pure and of price: they will covet her."
I made no answer. Graham Bretton had dined with us that day; he had
shone both in converse and looks: I know not what pride of bloom
embellished his aspect and mellowed his intercourse. Under the
stimulus of a high hope, something had unfolded in his whole manner
which compelled attention. I think he had purposed on that day to
indicate the origin of his endeavours, and the aim of his ambition. M.
de Bassompierre had found himself forced, in a manner, to descry the
direction and catch the character of his homage. Slow in remarking, he
was logical in reasoning: having once seized the thread, it had guided
him through a long labyrinth.
"Where is she?" he asked.
"She is up-stairs."
"What is she doing?"
"She is writing."
"She writes, does she? Does she receive letters?"
"None but such as she can show me. And--sir--she--_they_ have
long wanted to consult you."
"Pshaw! They don't think of me--an old father! I am in the way."
"Ah, M. de Bassompierre--not so--that can't be! But Paulina must speak
for herself: and Dr. Bretton, too, must be his own advocate."
"It is a little late. Matters are advanced, it seems."
"Sir, till you approve, nothing is done--only they love each other."
"Only!" he echoed.
Invested by fate with the part of confidante and mediator, I was
obliged to go on: "Hundreds of times has Dr. Bretton been on the point
of appealing to you, sir; but, with all his high courage, he fears you
mortally."
"He may well--he may well fear me. He has touched the best thing I
have. Had he but let her alone, she would have remained a child for
years yet. So. Are they engaged?"
"They could not become engaged without your permission."
"It is well for you, Miss Snowe, to talk and think with that propriety
which always characterizes you; but this matter is a grief to me; my
little girl was all I had: I have no more daughters and no son;
Bretton might as well have looked elsewhere; there are scores of rich
and pretty women who would not, I daresay, dislike him: he has looks,
and conduct, and connection. Would nothing serve him but my Polly?"
"If he had never seen your 'Polly,' others might and would have
pleased him--your niece, Miss Fanshawe, for instance."
"Ah! I would have given him Ginevra with all my heart; but Polly!--I
can't let him have her. No--I can't. He is not her equal," he
affirmed, rather gruffly. "In what particular is he her match? They
talk of fortune! I am not an avaricious or interested man, but the
world thinks of these things--and Polly will be rich."
"Yes, that is known," said I: "all Villette knows her as an heiress."
"Do they talk of my little girl in that light?"
"They do, sir."
He fell into deep thought. I ventured to say, "Would you, sir, think
any one Paulina's match? Would you prefer any other to Dr. Bretton? Do
you think higher rank or more wealth would make much difference in
your feelings towards a future son-in-law?"
"You touch me there," said he.
"Look at the aristocracy of Villette--you would not like them, sir?"
"I should not--never a duc, baron, or vicomte of the lot."
"I am told many of these persons think about her, sir," I went on,
gaining courage on finding that I met attention rather than repulse.
"Other suitors will come, therefore, if Dr. Bretton is refused.
Wherever you go, I suppose, aspirants will not be wanting. Independent
of heiress-ship, it appears to me that Paulina charms most of those
who see her."
"Does she? How? My little girl is not thought a beauty."
"Sir, Miss de Bassompierre is very beautiful."
"Nonsense!--begging your pardon, Miss Snowe, but I think you are too
partial. I like Polly: I like all her ways and all her looks--but then
I am her father; and even I never thought about beauty. She is
amusing, fairy-like, interesting to me;--you must be mistaken in
supposing her handsome?"
"She attracts, sir: she would attract without the advantages of your
wealth and position."
"My wealth and position! Are these any bait to Graham? If I thought
so----"
"Dr. Bretton knows these points perfectly, as you may be sure, M. de
Bassompierre, and values them as any gentleman would--as _you_
would yourself, under the same circumstances--but they are not his
baits. He loves your daughter very much; he feels her finest
qualities, and they influence him worthily."
"What! has my little pet 'fine qualities?'"
"Ah, sir! did you observe her that evening when so many men of
eminence and learning dined here?"
"I certainly was rather struck and surprised with her manner that day;
its womanliness made me smile."
"And did you see those accomplished Frenchmen gather round her in the
drawing-room?"
"I did; but I thought it was by way of relaxation--as one might amuse
one's self with a pretty infant."
"Sir, she demeaned herself with distinction; and I heard the French
gentlemen say she was 'petrie d'esprit et de graces.' Dr. Bretton
thought the same."
"She is a good, dear child, that is certain; and I _do_ believe
she has some character. When I think of it, I was once ill; Polly
nursed me; they thought I should die; she, I recollect, grew at once
stronger and tenderer as I grew worse in health. And as I recovered,
what a sunbeam she was in my sick-room! Yes; she played about my chair
as noiselessly and as cheerful as light. And now she is sought in
marriage! I don't want to part with her," said he, and he groaned.
"You have known Dr. and Mrs. Bretton so long," I suggested, "it would
be less like separation to give her to him than to another."
He reflected rather gloomily.
"True. I have long known Louisa Bretton," he murmured. "She and I are
indeed old, old friends; a sweet, kind girl she was when she was
young. You talk of beauty, Miss Snowe! _she_ was handsome, if you
will--tall, straight, and blooming--not the mere child or elf my Polly
seems to me: at eighteen,