not a street
in a pleasant and ancient English city.
I looked, on the contrary, through a frame of leafage, clustering
round the high lattice, and forth thence to a grassy mead-like level,
a lawn-terrace with trees rising from the lower ground beyond--high
forest-trees, such as I had not seen for many a day. They were now
groaning under the gale of October, and between their trunks I traced
the line of an avenue, where yellow leaves lay in heaps and drifts, or
were whirled singly before the sweeping west wind. Whatever landscape
might lie further must have been flat, and these tall beeches shut it
out. The place seemed secluded, and was to me quite strange: I did not
know it at all.
Once more I lay down. My bed stood in a little alcove; on turning my
face to the wall, the room with its bewildering accompaniments became
excluded. Excluded? No! For as I arranged my position in this hope,
behold, on the green space between the divided and looped-up curtains,
hung a broad, gilded picture-frame enclosing a portrait. It was drawn
--well drawn, though but a sketch--in water-colours; a head, a boy's
head, fresh, life-like, speaking, and animated. It seemed a youth of
sixteen, fair-complexioned, with sanguine health in his cheek; hair
long, not dark, and with a sunny sheen; penetrating eyes, an arch
mouth, and a gay smile. On the whole a most pleasant face to look at,
especially for, those claiming a right to that youth's affections--
parents, for instance, or sisters. Any romantic little school-girl
might almost have loved it in its frame. Those eyes looked as if when
somewhat older they would flash a lightning-response to love: I cannot
tell whether they kept in store the steady-beaming shine of faith. For
whatever sentiment met him in form too facile, his lips menaced,
beautifully but surely, caprice and light esteem.
Striving to take each new discovery as quietly as I could, I whispered
to myself--
"Ah! that portrait used to hang in the breakfast-room, over the
mantel-piece: somewhat too high, as I thought. I well remember how I
used to mount a music-stool for the purpose of unhooking it, holding
it in my hand, and searching into those bonny wells of eyes, whose
glance under their hazel lashes seemed like a pencilled laugh; and
well I liked to note the colouring of the cheek, and the expression of
the mouth." I hardly believed fancy could improve on the curve of that
mouth, or of the chin; even _my_ ignorance knew that both were
beautiful, and pondered perplexed over this doubt: "How it was that
what charmed so much, could at the same time so keenly pain?" Once, by
way of test, I took little Missy Home, and, lifting her in my arms,
told her to look at the picture.
"Do you like it, Polly?" I asked. She never answered, but gazed long,
and at last a darkness went trembling through her sensitive eye, as
she said, "Put me down." So I put her down, saying to myself: "The
child feels it too."
All these things do I now think over, adding, "He had his faults, yet
scarce ever was a finer nature; liberal, suave, impressible." My
reflections closed in an audibly pronounced word, "Graham!"
"Graham!" echoed a sudden voice at the bedside. "Do you want Graham?"
I looked. The plot was but thickening; the wonder but culminating. If
it was strange to see that well-remembered pictured form on the wall,
still stranger was it to turn and behold the equally well-remembered
living form opposite--a woman, a lady, most real and substantial,
tall, well-attired, wearing widow's silk, and such a cap as best
became her matron and motherly braids of hair. Hers, too, was a good
face; too marked, perhaps, now for beauty, but not for sense or
character. She was little changed; something sterner, something more
robust--but she was my godmother: still the distinct vision of Mrs.
Bretton.
I kept quiet, yet internally _I_ was much agitated: my pulse
fluttered, and the blood left my cheek, which turned cold.
"Madam, where am I?" I inquired.
"In a very safe asylum; well protected for the present; make your mind
quite easy till you get a little better; you look ill this morning."
"I am so entirely bewildered, I do not know whether I can trust my
senses at all, or whether they are misleading me in every particular:
but you speak English, do you not, madam?"
"I should think you might hear that: it would puzzle me to hold a long
discourse in French."
"You do not come from England?"
"I am lately arrived thence. Have you been long in this country? You
seem to know my son?"
"Do, I, madam? Perhaps I do. Your son--the picture there?"
"That is his portrait as a youth. While looking at it, you pronounced
his name."
"Graham Bretton?"
She nodded.
"I speak to Mrs. Bretton, formerly of Bretton, ----shire?"
"Quite right; and you, I am told, are an English teacher in a foreign
school here: my son recognised you as such."
"How was I found, madam, and by whom?"
"My son shall tell you that by-and-by," said she; "but at present you
are too confused and weak for conversation: try to eat some breakfast,
and then sleep."
Notwithstanding all I had undergone--the bodily fatigue, the
perturbation of spirits, the exposure to weather--it seemed that I was
better: the fever, the real malady which had oppressed my frame, was
abating; for, whereas during the last nine days I had taken no solid
food, and suffered from continual thirst, this morning, on breakfast
being offered, I experienced a craving for nourishment: an inward
faintness which caused me eagerly to taste the tea this lady offered,
and to eat the morsel of dry toast she allowed in accompaniment. It
was only a morsel, but it sufficed; keeping up my strength till some
two or three hours afterwards, when the bonne brought me a little cup
of broth and a biscuit.
As evening began to darken, and the ceaseless blast still blew wild
and cold, and the rain streamed on, deluge-like, I grew weary--very
weary of my bed. The room, though pretty, was small: I felt it
confining: I longed for a change. The increasing chill and gathering
gloom, too, depressed me; I wanted to see--to feel firelight. Besides,
I kept thinking of the son of that tall matron: when should I see him?
Certainly not till I left my room.
At last the bonne came to make my bed for the night. She prepared to
wrap