their English
lesson?
"In classe, Madame?" I asked.
"Yes, in classe: in the second division."
"Where there are sixty pupils," said I; for I knew the number, and
with my usual base habit of cowardice, I shrank into my sloth like a
snail into its shell, and alleged incapacity and impracticability as a
pretext to escape action. If left to myself, I should infallibly have
let this chance slip. Inadventurous, unstirred by impulses of
practical ambition, I was capable of sitting twenty years teaching
infants the hornbook, turning silk dresses and making children's
frocks. Not that true contentment dignified this infatuated
resignation: my work had neither charm for my taste, nor hold on my
interest; but it seemed to me a great thing to be without heavy
anxiety, and relieved from intimate trial: the negation of severe
suffering was the nearest approach to happiness I expected to know.
Besides, I seemed to hold two lives--the life of thought, and that of
reality; and, provided the former was nourished with a sufficiency of
the strange necromantic joys of fancy, the privileges of the latter
might remain limited to daily bread, hourly work, and a roof of
shelter.
"Come," said Madame, as I stooped more busily than ever over the
cutting-out of a child's pinafore, "leave that work."
"But Fifine wants it, Madame."
"Fifine must want it, then, for I want _you_."
And as Madame Beck did really want and was resolved to have me--as she
had long been dissatisfied with the English master, with his
shortcomings in punctuality, and his careless method of tuition--as,
too, _she_ did not lack resolution and practical activity,
whether _I_ lacked them or not--she, without more ado, made me
relinquish thimble and needle; my hand was taken into hers, and I was
conducted down-stairs. When we reached the carre, a large square hall
between the dwelling-house and the pensionnat, she paused, dropped my
hand, faced, and scrutinized me. I was flushed, and tremulous from
head to foot: tell it not in Gath, I believe I was crying. In fact,
the difficulties before me were far from being wholly imaginary; some
of them were real enough; and not the least substantial lay in my want
of mastery over the medium through which I should be obliged to teach.
I had, indeed, studied French closely since my arrival in Villette;
learning its practice by day, and its theory in every leisure moment
at night, to as late an hour as the rule of the house would allow
candle-light; but I was far from yet being able to trust my powers of
correct oral expression.
"Dites donc," said Madame sternly, "vous sentez vous reellement trop
faible?"
I might have said "Yes," and gone back to nursery obscurity, and
there, perhaps, mouldered for the rest of my life; but looking up at
Madame, I saw in her countenance a something that made me think twice
ere I decided. At that instant she did not wear a woman's aspect, but
rather a man's. Power of a particular kind strongly limned itself in
all her traits, and that power was not my kind of power: neither
sympathy, nor congeniality, nor submission, were the emotions it
awakened. I stood--not soothed, nor won, nor overwhelmed. It seemed as
if a challenge of strength between opposing gifts was given, and I
suddenly felt all the dishonour of my diffidence--all the
pusillanimity of my slackness to aspire.
"Will you," she said, "go backward or forward?" indicating with her
hand, first, the small door of communication with the dwelling-house,
and then the great double portals of the classes or schoolrooms.
"En avant," I said.
"But," pursued she, cooling as I warmed, and continuing the hard look,
from very antipathy to which I drew strength and determination, "can
you face the classes, or are you over-excited?"
She sneered slightly in saying this: nervous excitability was not much
to Madame's taste.
"I am no more excited than this stone," I said, tapping the flag with
my toe: "or than you," I added, returning her look.
"Bon! But let me tell you these are not quiet, decorous, English girls
you are going to encounter. Ce sont des Labassecouriennes, rondes,
franches, brusques, et tant soit peu rebelles."
I said: "I know; and I know, too, that though I have studied French
hard since I came here, yet I still speak it with far too much
hesitation--too little accuracy to be able to command their respect I
shall make blunders that will lay me open to the scorn of the most
ignorant. Still I mean to give the lesson."
"They always throw over timid teachers," said she.
"I know that too, Madame; I have heard how they rebelled against and
persecuted Miss Turner"--a poor friendless English teacher, whom
Madame had employed, and lightly discarded; and to whose piteous
history I was no stranger.
"C'est vrai," said she, coolly. "Miss Turner had no more command over
them than a servant from the kitchen would have had. She was weak and
wavering; she had neither tact nor intelligence, decision nor dignity.
Miss Turner would not do for these girls at all."
I made no reply, but advanced to the closed schoolroom door.
"You will not expect aid from me, or from any one," said Madame. "That
would at once set you down as incompetent for your office."
I opened the door, let her pass with courtesy, and followed her. There
were three schoolrooms, all large. That dedicated to the second
division, where I was to figure, was considerably the largest, and
accommodated an assemblage more numerous, more turbulent, and
infinitely more unmanageable than the other two. In after days, when I
knew the ground better, I used to think sometimes (if such a
comparison may be permitted), that the quiet, polished, tame first
division was to the robust, riotous, demonstrative second division,
what the English House of Lords is to the House of Commons.
The first glance informed me that many of the pupils were more than
girls--quite young women; I knew that some of them were of noble
family (as nobility goes in Labassecour), and I was well convinced
that not one amongst them was ignorant of my position in Madame's
household. As I mounted the estrade (a low platform, raised a step
above the flooring), where stood the teacher's chair and desk, I
beheld opposite to me a row of eyes and brows that threatened stormy
weather--eyes full of an insolent light, and brows hard and unblushing
as marble. The continental "female" is quite a different being to the
insular "female" of the same age and class: