to take our lessons in the
Rue Crecy of the same mistress; this arrangement threw us together for
some hours of every week. M. de Bassompierre seemed quite pleased: it
perfectly met his approbation, that Madame Minerva Gravity should
associate a portion of her leisure with that of his fair and dear
child.
That other self-elected judge of mine, the professor in the Rue
Fossette, discovering by some surreptitious spying means, that I was
no longer so stationary as hitherto, but went out regularly at certain
hours of certain days, took it upon himself to place me under
surveillance. People said M. Emanuel had been brought up amongst
Jesuits. I should more readily have accredited this report had his
manoeuvres been better masked. As it was, I doubted it. Never was a
more undisguised schemer, a franker, looser intriguer. He would
analyze his own machinations: elaborately contrive plots, and
forthwith indulge in explanatory boasts of their skill. I know not
whether I was more amused or provoked, by his stepping up to me one
morning and whispering solemnly that he "had his eye on me: _he_
at least would discharge the duty of a friend, and not leave me
entirely to my own devices. My, proceedings seemed at present very
unsettled: he did not know what to make of them: he thought his cousin
Beck very much to blame in suffering this sort of fluttering
inconsistency in a teacher attached to her house. What had a person
devoted to a serious calling, that of education, to do with Counts and
Countesses, hotels and chateaux? To him, I seemed altogether 'en
l'air.' On his faith, he believed I went out six days in the seven."
I said, "Monsieur exaggerated. I certainly had enjoyed the advantage
of a little change lately, but not before it had become necessary; and
the privilege was by no means exercised in excess."
"Necessary! How was it necessary? I was well enough, he supposed?
Change necessary! He would recommend me to look at the Catholic
'religieuses,' and study _their_ lives. _They_ asked no change."
I am no judge of what expression crossed my face when he thus spoke,
but it was one which provoked him: he accused me of being reckless,
worldly, and epicurean; ambitious of greatness, and feverishly athirst
for the pomps and vanities of life. It seems I had no "devouement," no
"recueillement" in my character; no spirit of grace, faith, sacrifice,
or self-abasement. Feeling the inutility of answering these charges, I
mutely continued the correction of a pile of English exercises.
"He could see in me nothing Christian: like many other Protestants, I
revelled in the pride and self-will of paganism."
I slightly turned from him, nestling still closer under the wing of
silence.
A vague sound grumbled between his teeth; it could not surely be a
"juron:" he was too religious for that; but I am certain I heard the
word _sacre_. Grievous to relate, the same word was repeated,
with the unequivocal addition of _mille_ something, when I passed
him about two hours afterwards in the corridor, prepared to go and
take my German lesson in the Rue Crecy. Never was a better little man,
in some points, than M. Paul: never, in others, a more waspish little
despot.
* * * * *
Our German mistress, Fraeulein Anna Braun, was a worthy, hearty woman,
of about forty-five; she ought, perhaps, to have lived in the days of
Queen Elizabeth, as she habitually consumed, for her first and second
breakfasts, beer and beef: also, her direct and downright Deutsch
nature seemed to suffer a sensation of cruel restraint from what she
called our English reserve; though we thought we were very cordial
with her: but we did not slap her on the shoulder, and if we consented
to kiss her cheek, it was done quietly, and without any explosive
smack. These omissions oppressed and depressed her considerably;
still, on the whole, we got on very well. Accustomed to instruct
foreign girls, who hardly ever will think and study for themselves--
who have no idea of grappling with a difficulty, and overcoming it by
dint of reflection or application--our progress, which in truth was
very leisurely, seemed to astound her. In her eyes, we were a pair of
glacial prodigies, cold, proud, and preternatural.
The young Countess _was_ a little proud, a little fastidious: and
perhaps, with her native delicacy and beauty, she had a right to these
feelings; but I think it was a total mistake to ascribe them to me. I
never evaded the morning salute, which Paulina would slip when she
could; nor was a certain little manner of still disdain a weapon known
in my armoury of defence; whereas, Paulina always kept it clear, fine,
and bright, and any rough German sally called forth at once its
steelly glisten.
Honest Anna Braun, in some measure, felt this difference; and while
she half-feared, half-worshipped Paulina, as a sort of dainty nymph--
an Undine--she took refuge with me, as a being all mortal, and of
easier mood.
A book we liked well to read and translate was Schiller's Ballads;
Paulina soon learned to read them beautifully; the Fraeulein would
listen to her with a broad smile of pleasure, and say her voice
sounded like music. She translated them, too, with a facile flow of
language, and in a strain of kindred and poetic fervour: her cheek
would flush, her lips tremblingly smile, her beauteous eyes kindle or
melt as she went on. She learnt the best by heart, and would often
recite them when we were alone together. One she liked well was "Des
Maedchens Klage:" that is, she liked well to repeat the words, she
found plaintive melody in the sound; the sense she would criticise.
She murmured, as we sat over the fire one evening:--
Du Heilige, rufe dein Kind zurueck,
Ich habe genossen das irdische Glueck,
Ich habe gelebt und geliebet!
"Lived and loved!" said she, "is that the summit of earthly happiness,
the end of life--to love? I don't think it is. It may be the extreme
of mortal misery, it may be sheer waste of time, and fruitless torture
of feeling. If Schiller had said to _be_ loved, he might have
come nearer the truth. Is not that another thing, Lucy, to be loved?"
"I suppose it may be: but why consider the subject? What is love to
you? What do you know about it?"
She crimsoned, half in irritation, half in shame.
"Now, Lucy," she said, "I won't take that from you. It may be well