intonation which, deep before,
had now descended some notes lower.
"Monsieur," said Mademoiselle St. Pierre, rising, and this time
speaking with her own sweet smile, "I have the honour to tell you
that, with a single exception, every person in classe has offered her
bouquet. For Meess Lucie, Monsieur will kindly make allowance; as a
foreigner she probably did not know our customs, or did not appreciate
their significance. Meess Lucie has regarded this ceremony as too
frivolous to be honoured by her observance."
"Famous!" I muttered between my teeth: "you are no bad speaker, Zelie,
when you begin."
The answer vouchsafed to Mademoiselle St Pierre from the estrade was
given in the gesticulation of a hand from behind the pyramid. This
manual action seemed to deprecate words, to enjoin silence.
A form, ere long, followed the hand. Monsieur emerged from his
eclipse; and producing himself on the front of his estrade, and gazing
straight and fixedly before him at a vast "mappe-monde" covering the
wall opposite, he demanded a third time, and now in really tragic
tones--
"Est-ce la tout?"
I might yet have made all right, by stepping forwards and slipping
into his hand the ruddy little shell-box I at that moment held tight
in my own. It was what I had fully purposed to do; but, first, the
comic side of Monsieur's behaviour had tempted me to delay, and now,
Mademoiselle St. Pierre's affected interference provoked contumacity.
The reader not having hitherto had any cause to ascribe to Miss
Snowe's character the most distant pretensions to perfection, will be
scarcely surprised to learn that she felt too perverse to defend
herself from any imputation the Parisienne might choose to insinuate
and besides, M. Paul was so tragic, and took my defection so
seriously, he deserved to be vexed. I kept, then, both my box and my
countenance, and sat insensate as any stone.
"It is well!" dropped at length from the lips of M. Paul; and having
uttered this phrase, the shadow of some great paroxysm--the swell of
wrath, scorn, resolve--passed over his brow, rippled his lips, and
lined his cheeks. Gulping down all further comment, he launched into
his customary "discours."
I can't at all remember what this "discours" was; I did not listen to
it: the gulping-down process, the abrupt dismissal of his
mortification or vexation, had given me a sensation which half-
counteracted the ludicrous effect of the reiterated "Est-ce la tout?"
Towards the close of the speech there came a pleasing diversion my
attention was again amusingly arrested.
Owing to some little accidental movement--I think I dropped my thimble
on the floor, and in stooping to regain it, hit the crown of my head
against the sharp corner of my desk; which casualties (exasperating to
me, by rights, if to anybody) naturally made a slight bustle--M. Paul
became irritated, and dismissing his forced equanimity, and casting to
the winds that dignity and self-control with which he never cared long
to encumber himself, he broke forth into the strain best calculated to
give him ease.
I don't know how, in the progress of his "discours," he had contrived
to cross the Channel and land on British ground; but there I found him
when I began to listen.
Casting a quick, cynical glance round the room--a glance which
scathed, or was intended to scathe, as it crossed me--he fell with
fury upon "les Anglaises."
Never have I heard English women handled as M. Paul that morning
handled them: he spared nothing--neither their minds, morals, manners,
nor personal appearance. I specially remember his abuse of their tall
stature, their long necks, their thin arms, their slovenly dress,
their pedantic education, their impious scepticism(!), their
insufferable pride, their pretentious virtue: over which he ground his
teeth malignantly, and looked as if, had he dared, he would have said
singular things. Oh! he was spiteful, acrid, savage; and, as a natural
consequence, detestably ugly.
"Little wicked venomous man!" thought I; "am I going to harass myself
with fears of displeasing you, or hurting your feelings? No, indeed;
you shall be indifferent to me, as the shabbiest bouquet in your
pyramid"
I grieve to say I could not quite carry out this resolution. For some
time the abuse of England and the English found and left me stolid: I
bore it some fifteen minutes stoically enough; but this hissing
cockatrice was determined to sting, and he said such things at last--
fastening not only upon our women, but upon our greatest names and
best men; sullying, the shield of Britannia, and dabbling the union
jack in mud--that I was stung. With vicious relish he brought up the
most spicy current continental historical falsehoods--than which
nothing can be conceived more offensive. Zelie, and the whole class,
became one grin of vindictive delight; for it is curious to discover
how these clowns of Labassecour secretly hate England. At last, I
struck a sharp stroke on my desk, opened my lips, and let loose this
cry:--
"Vive l'Angleterre, l'Histoire et les Heros! A bas la France, la
Fiction et les Faquins!"
The class was struck of a heap. I suppose they thought me mad. The
Professor put up his handkerchief, and fiendishly smiled into its
folds. Little monster of malice! He now thought he had got the
victory, since he had made me angry. In a second he became good-
humoured. With great blandness he resumed the subject of his flowers;
talked poetically and symbolically of their sweetness, perfume,
purity, etcetera; made Frenchified comparisons between the "jeunes
filles" and the sweet blossoms before him; paid Mademoiselle St.
Pierre a very full-blown compliment on the superiority of her bouquet;
and ended by announcing that the first really fine, mild, and balmy
morning in spring, he intended to take the whole class out to
breakfast in the country. "Such of the class, at least," he added,
with emphasis, "as he could count amongst the number of his friends."
"Donc je n'y serai pas," declared I, involuntarily.
"Soit!" was his response; and, gathering his flowers in his arms, he
flashed out of classe; while I, consigning my work, scissors, thimble,
and the neglected little box, to my desk, swept up-stairs. I don't
know whether _he_ felt hot and angry, but I am free to confess
that _I_ did.
Yet with a strange evanescent anger, I had not sat an hour on the edge
of my bed, picturing and repicturing his look, manner, words ere I
smiled at the whole scene. A little pang of regret I underwent that
the box had not been offered. I had meant to gratify him. Fate would
not