crystals of the sea. While I speak
you eye me strangely. Shall I tell you of what I am reminded while
watching you?"
"Monsieur, I shall be called away to prayers shortly; my time for
conversation is very scant and brief at this hour--excuse----"
"I excuse everything," he interrupted; "my mood is so meek, neither
rebuff nor, perhaps, insult could ruffle it. You remind me, then, of a
young she wild creature, new caught, untamed, viewing with a mixture
of fire and fear the first entrance of the breaker-in."
Unwarrantable accost!--rash and rude if addressed to a pupil; to a
teacher inadmissible. He thought to provoke a warm reply; I had seen
him vex the passionate to explosion before now. In me his malice
should find no gratification; I sat silent.
"You look," said he, "like one who would snatch at a draught of sweet
poison, and spurn wholesome bitters with disgust.
"Indeed, I never liked bitters; nor do I believe them wholesome. And
to whatever is sweet, be it poison or food, you cannot, at least, deny
its own delicious quality--sweetness. Better, perhaps, to die quickly
a pleasant death, than drag on long a charmless life."
"Yet," said he, "you should take your bitter dose duly and daily, if I
had the power to administer it; and, as to the well-beloved poison, I
would, perhaps, break the very cup which held it."
I sharply turned my head away, partly because his presence utterly
displeased me, and partly because I wished to shun questions: lest, in
my present mood, the effort of answering should overmaster self-
command.
"Come," said he, more softly, "tell me the truth--you grieve at being
parted from friends--is it not so?"
The insinuating softness was not more acceptable than the
inquisitorial curiosity. I was silent. He came into the room, sat down
on the bench about two yards from me, and persevered long, and, for
him, patiently, in attempts to draw me into conversation--attempts
necessarily unavailing, because I _could_ not talk. At last I
entreated to be let alone. In uttering the request, my voice faltered,
my head sank on my arms and the table. I wept bitterly, though
quietly. He sat a while longer. I did not look up nor speak, till the
closing door and his retreating step told me that he was gone. These
tears proved a relief.
I had time to bathe my eyes before breakfast, and I suppose I appeared
at that meal as serene as any other person: not, however, quite as
jocund-looking as the young lady who placed herself in the seat
opposite mine, fixed on me a pair of somewhat small eyes twinkling
gleefully, and frankly stretched across the table a white hand to be
shaken. Miss Fanshawe's travels, gaieties, and flirtations agreed with
her mightily; she had become quite plump, her cheeks looked as round
as apples. I had seen her last in elegant evening attire. I don't know
that she looked less charming now in her school-dress, a kind of
careless peignoir of a dark-blue material, dimly and dingily plaided
with black. I even think this dusky wrapper gave her charms a triumph;
enhancing by contrast the fairness of her skin, the freshness of her
bloom, the golden beauty of her tresses.
"I am glad you are come back, Timon," said she. Timon was one of her
dozen names for me. "You don't know how often I have wanted you in
this dismal hole."
"Oh, have you? Then, of course, if you wanted me, you have something
for me to do: stockings to mend, perhaps." I never gave Ginevra a
minute's or a farthing's credit for disinterestedness.
"Crabbed and crusty as ever!" said she. "I expected as much: it would
not be you if you did not snub one. But now, come, grand-mother, I
hope you like coffee as much, and pistolets as little as ever: are you
disposed to barter?"
"Take your own way."
This way consisted in a habit she had of making me convenient. She did
not like the morning cup of coffee; its school brewage not being
strong or sweet enough to suit her palate; and she had an excellent
appetite, like any other healthy school-girl, for the morning
pistolets or rolls, which were new-baked and very good, and of which a
certain allowance was served to each. This allowance being more than I
needed, I gave half to Ginevra; never varying in my preference, though
many others used to covet the superfluity; and she in return would
sometimes give me a portion of her coffee. This morning I was glad of
the draught; hunger I had none, and with thirst I was parched. I don't
know why I chose to give my bread rather to Ginevra than to another;
nor why, if two had to share the convenience of one drinking-vessel,
as sometimes happened--for instance, when we took a long walk into the
country, and halted for refreshment at a farm--I always contrived that
she should be my convive, and rather liked to let her take the lion's
share, whether of the white beer, the sweet wine, or the new milk: so
it was, however, and she knew it; and, therefore, while we wrangled
daily, we were never alienated.
After breakfast my custom was to withdraw to the first classe, and sit
and read, or think (oftenest the latter) there alone, till the nine-
o'clock bell threw open all doors, admitted the gathered rush of
externes and demi-pensionnaires, and gave the signal for entrance on
that bustle and business to which, till five P.M., there was no relax.
I was just seated this morning, when a tap came to the door.
"Pardon, Mademoiselle," said a pensionnaire, entering gently; and
having taken from her desk some necessary book or paper, she withdrew
on tip-toe, murmuring as she passed me, "Que mademoiselle est
appliquee!"
Appliquee, indeed! The means of application were spread before me, but
I was doing nothing; and had done nothing, and meant to do nothing.
Thus does the world give us credit for merits we have not. Madame Beck
herself deemed me a regular bas-bleu, and often and solemnly used to
warn me not to study too much, lest "the blood should all go to my
head." Indeed, everybody in the Rue Fossette held a superstition that
"Meess Lucie" was learned; with the notable exception of M. Emanuel,
who, by means peculiar to himself, and quite inscrutable to me, had
obtained a not inaccurate inkling of my real qualifications, and used
to take quiet opportunities of chuckling in my