from
home."
Now the child was well enough, only warm with the warmth of July; it
was scarcely less needful to send for a priest to administer extreme
unction than for a doctor to prescribe a dose; also Madame rarely made
"courses," as she called them, in the evening: moreover, this was the
first time she had chosen to absent herself on the occasion of a visit
from Dr. John. The whole arrangement indicated some plan; this I saw,
but without the least anxiety. "Ha! ha! Madame," laughed Light-heart
the Beggar, "your crafty wits are on the wrong tack."
She departed, attired very smartly, in a shawl of price, and a certain
_chapeau vert tendre_--hazardous, as to its tint, for any
complexion less fresh than her own, but, to her, not unbecoming. I
wondered what she intended: whether she really would send Dr. John or
not; or whether indeed he would come: he might be engaged.
Madame had charged me not to let Georgette sleep till the doctor came;
I had therefore sufficient occupation in telling her nursery tales and
palavering the little language for her benefit. I affected Georgette;
she was a sensitive and a loving child: to hold her in my lap, or
carry her in my arms, was to me a treat. To-night she would have me
lay my head on the pillow of her crib; she even put her little arms
round my neck. Her clasp, and the nestling action with which she
pressed her cheek to mine, made me almost cry with a tender pain.
Feeling of no kind abounded in that house; this pure little drop from
a pure little source was too sweet: it penetrated deep, and subdued
the heart, and sent a gush to the eyes. Half an hour or an hour
passed; Georgette murmured in her soft lisp that she was growing
sleepy. "And you _shall_ sleep," thought I, "malgre maman and
medecin, if they are not here in ten minutes."
Hark! There was the ring, and there the tread, astonishing the
staircase by the fleetness with which it left the steps behind. Rosine
introduced Dr. John, and, with a freedom of manner not altogether
peculiar to herself, but characteristic of the domestics of Villette
generally, she stayed to hear what he had to say. Madame's presence
would have awed her back to her own realm of the vestibule and the
cabinet--for mine, or that of any other teacher or pupil, she cared
not a jot. Smart, trim and pert, she stood, a hand in each pocket of
her gay grisette apron, eyeing Dr. John with no more fear or shyness
than if he had been a picture instead of a living gentleman.
"Le marmot n'a rien, nest-ce pas?" said she, indicating Georgette with
a jerk of her chin.
"Pas beaucoup," was the answer, as the doctor hastily scribbled with
his pencil some harmless prescription.
"Eh bien!" pursued Rosine, approaching him quite near, while he put up
his pencil. "And the box--did you get it? Monsieur went off like a
coup-de-vent the other night; I had not time to ask him."
"I found it: yes."
"And who threw it, then?" continued Rosine, speaking quite freely the
very words I should so much have wished to say, but had no address or
courage to bring it out: how short some people make the road to a
point which, for others, seems unattainable!
"That may be my secret," rejoined Dr. John briefly, but with no, sort
of hauteur: he seemed quite to understand the Rosine or grisette
character.
"Mais enfin," continued she, nothing abashed, "monsieur knew it was
thrown, since be came to seek it--how did he know?"
"I was attending a little patient in the college near," said he, "and
saw it dropped out of his chamber window, and so came to pick it up."
How simple the whole explanation! The note had alluded to a physician
as then examining "Gustave."
"Ah ca!" pursued Rosine; "il n'y a donc rien la-dessous: pas de
mystere, pas d'amourette, par exemple?"
"Pas plus que sur ma main," responded the doctor, showing his palm.
"Quel dommage!" responded the grisette: "et moi--a qui tout cela
commencait a donner des idees."
"Vraiment! vous en etes pour vos frais," was the doctor's cool
rejoinder.
She pouted. The doctor could not help laughing at the sort of "moue"
she made: when he laughed, he had something peculiarly good-natured
and genial in his look. I saw his hand incline to his pocket.
"How many times have you opened the door for me within this last
month?" he asked.
"Monsieur ought to have kept count of that," said Rosine, quite
readily.
"As if I had not something better to do!" rejoined he; but I saw him
give her a piece of gold, which she took unscrupulously, and then
danced off to answer the door-bell, ringing just now every five
minutes, as the various servants came to fetch the half-boarders.
The reader must not think too hardly of Rosine; on the whole, she was
not a bad sort of person, and had no idea there could be any disgrace
in grasping at whatever she could get, or any effrontery in chattering
like a pie to the best gentleman in Christendom.
I had learnt something from the above scene besides what concerned the
ivory box: viz., that not on the robe de jaconas, pink or grey, nor
yet on the frilled and pocketed apron, lay the blame of breaking Dr.
John's heart: these items of array were obviously guiltless as
Georgette's little blue tunic. So much the better. But who then was
the culprit? What was the ground--what the origin--what the perfect
explanation of the whole business? Some points had been cleared, but
how many yet remained obscure as night!
"However," I said to myself, "it is no affair of yours;" and turning
from the face on which I had been unconsciously dwelling with a
questioning gaze, I looked through the window which commanded the
garden below. Dr. John, meantime, standing by the bed-side, was slowly
drawing on his gloves and watching his little patient, as her eyes
closed and her rosy lips parted in coming sleep. I waited till he
should depart as usual, with a quick bow and scarce articulate "good-
night.". Just as he took his hat, my eyes, fixed on the tall houses
bounding the garden, saw the one lattice, already commemorated,
cautiously open; forth from the aperture projected a hand and a white
handkerchief; both waved. I know not whether the signal was answered
from some viewless quarter of our