in front for the
accommodation of worshipping connoisseurs, who, having gazed
themselves off their feet, might be fain to complete the business
sitting: this picture, I say, seemed to consider itself the queen of
the collection.
It represented a woman, considerably larger, I thought, than the life.
I calculated that this lady, put into a scale of magnitude, suitable
for the reception of a commodity of bulk, would infallibly turn from
fourteen to sixteen stone. She was, indeed, extremely well fed: very
much butcher's meat--to say nothing of bread, vegetables, and liquids
--must she have consumed to attain that breadth and height, that wealth
of muscle, that affluence of flesh. She lay half-reclined on a couch:
why, it would be difficult to say; broad daylight blazed round her;
she appeared in hearty health, strong enough to do the work of two
plain cooks; she could not plead a weak spine; she ought to have been
standing, or at least sitting bolt upright. She, had no business to
lounge away the noon on a sofa. She ought likewise to have worn decent
garments; a gown covering her properly, which was not the case: out of
abundance of material--seven-and-twenty yards, I should say, of
drapery--she managed to make inefficient raiment. Then, for the
wretched untidiness surrounding her, there could be no excuse. Pots
and pans--perhaps I ought to say vases and goblets--were rolled here
and there on the foreground; a perfect rubbish of flowers was mixed
amongst them, and an absurd and disorderly mass of curtain upholstery
smothered the couch and cumbered the floor. On referring to the
catalogue, I found that this notable production bore the name
"Cleopatra."
Well, I was sitting wondering at it (as the bench was there, I thought
I might as well take advantage of its accommodation), and thinking
that while some of the details--as roses, gold cups, jewels, &c., were
very prettily painted, it was on the whole an enormous piece of
claptrap; the room, almost vacant when I entered, began to fill.
Scarcely noticing this circumstance (as, indeed, it did not matter to
me) I retained my seat; rather to rest myself than with a view to
studying this huge, dark-complexioned gipsy-queen; of whom, indeed, I
soon tired, and betook myself for refreshment to the contemplation of
some exquisite little pictures of still life: wild-flowers, wild-
fruit, mossy woodnests, casketing eggs that looked like pearls seen
through clear green sea-water; all hung modestly beneath that coarse
and preposterous canvas.
Suddenly a light tap visited my shoulder. Starting, turning, I met a
face bent to encounter mine; a frowning, almost a shocked face it was.
"Que faites-vous ici?" said a voice.
"Mais, Monsieur, je m'amuse."
"Vous vous amusez! et a quoi, s'il vous plait? Mais d'abord, faites-
moi le plaisir de vous lever; prenez mon bras, et allons de l'autre
cote."
I did precisely as I was bid. M. Paul Emanuel (it was he) returned
from Rome, and now a travelled man, was not likely to be less tolerant
of insubordination now, than before this added distinction laurelled
his temples.
"Permit me to conduct you to your party," said he, as we crossed the
room.
"I have no party."
"You are not alone?"
"Yes, Monsieur."
"Did you come here unaccompanied?"
"No, Monsieur. Dr. Bretton brought me here."
"Dr. Bretton and Madame his mother, of course?"
"No; only Dr. Bretton."
"And he told you to look at _that_ picture?"
"By no means; I found it out for myself."
M. Paul's hair was shorn close as raven down, or I think it would have
bristled on his head. Beginning now to perceive his drift, I had a
certain pleasure in keeping cool, and working him up.
"Astounding insular audacity!" cried the Professor. "Singulieres
femmes que ces Anglaises!"
"What is the matter, Monsieur?"
"Matter! How dare you, a young person, sit coolly down, with the self-
possession of a garcon, and look at _that_ picture?"
"It is a very ugly picture, but I cannot at all see why I should not
look at it"
"Bon! bon! Speak no more of it. But you ought not to be here alone."
'If, however, I have no society--no _party_, as you say? And
then, what does it signify whether I am alone, or accompanied? nobody
meddles with me."
"Taisez-vous, et asseyez-vous la--la!"--setting down a chair with
emphasis in a particularly dull corner, before a series of most
specially dreary "cadres."
"Mais, Monsieur?"
"Mais, Mademoiselle, asseyez-vous, et ne bougez pas--entendez-vous?--
jusqu'a ce qu'on vienne vous chercher, ou que je vous donne la
permission."
"Quel triste coin!" cried I, "et quelles laids tableaux!"
And "laids," indeed, they were; being a set of four, denominated in
the catalogue "La vie d'une femme." They were painted rather in a
remarkable style--flat, dead, pale, and formal. The first represented
a "Jeune Fille," coming out of a church-door, a missal in her hand,
her dress very prim, her eyes cast down, her mouth pursed up--the
image of a most villanous little precocious she-hypocrite. The second,
a "Mariee," with a long white veil, kneeling at a prie-dieu in her
chamber, holding her hands plastered together, finger to finger, and
showing the whites of her eyes in a most exasperating manner. The
third, a "Jeune Mere," hanging disconsolate over a clayey and puffy
baby with a face like an unwholesome full moon. The fourth, a "Veuve,"
being a black woman, holding by the hand a black little girl, and the
twain studiously surveying an elegant French monument, set up in a
corner of some Pere la Chaise. All these four "Anges" were grim and
grey as burglars, and cold and vapid as ghosts. What women to live
with! insincere, ill-humoured, bloodless, brainless nonentities! As
bad in their way as the indolent gipsy-giantess, the Cleopatra, in
hers.
It was impossible to keep one's attention long confined to these
master-pieces, and so, by degrees, I veered round, and surveyed the
gallery.
A perfect crowd of spectators was by this time gathered round the
Lioness, from whose vicinage I had been banished; nearly half this
crowd were ladies, but M. Paul afterwards told me, these were "des
dames," and it was quite proper for them to contemplate what no
"demoiselle" ought to glance at. I assured him plainly I could not
agree in this doctrine, and did not see the sense of it; whereupon,
with his usual absolutism, he merely requested my silence, and also,
in the same breath, denounced my mingled rashness and ignorance. A
more despotic little man than M. Paul never filled a professor's
chair. I noticed, by the way, that he looked at the picture himself
quite at his ease, and for a very