weak only will laugh _at_ her. She shall not be ridiculed,
with my consent, at least; nor without my--my scorn--my antipathy--my--"
He stopped: and it was time--for he was getting excited--more it
seemed than the occasion warranted. I did not then know that he had
witnessed double cause for dissatisfaction with Miss Fanshawe. The
glow of his complexion, the expansion of his nostril, the bold curve
which disdain gave his well-cut under lip, showed him in a new and
striking phase. Yet the rare passion of the constitutionally suave and
serene, is not a pleasant spectacle; nor did I like the sort of
vindictive thrill which passed through his strong young frame.
"Do I frighten you, Lucy?" he asked.
"I cannot tell why you are so very angry."
"For this reason," he muttered in my ear. "Ginevra is neither a pure
angel, nor a pure-minded woman."
"Nonsense! you exaggerate: she has no great harm in her."
"Too much for me. _I_ can see where _you_ are blind. Now
dismiss the subject. Let me amuse myself by teasing mamma: I will
assert that she is flagging. Mamma, pray rouse yourself."
"John, I will certainly rouse you if you are not better conducted.
Will you and Lucy be silent, that I may hear the singing?"
They were then thundering in a chorus, under cover of which all the
previous dialogue had taken place.
"_You_ hear the singing, mamma! Now, I will wager my studs, which
are genuine, against your paste brooch--"
"My paste brooch, Graham? Profane boy! you know that it is a stone of
value."
"Oh! that is one of your superstitions: you were cheated in the
business."
"I am cheated in fewer things than you imagine. How do you happen to
be acquainted with young ladies of the court, John? I have observed
two of them pay you no small attention during the last half-hour."
"I wish you would not observe them."
"Why not? Because one of them satirically levels her eyeglass at me?
She is a pretty, silly girl: but are you apprehensive that her titter
will discomfit the old lady?"
"The sensible, admirable old lady! Mother, you are better to me than
ten wives yet."
"Don't be demonstrative, John, or I shall faint, and you will have to
carry me out; and if that burden were laid upon you, you would reverse
your last speech, and exclaim, 'Mother, ten wives could hardly be
worse to me than you are!'"
* * * * *
The concert over, the Lottery "au benefice des pauvres" came next: the
interval between was one of general relaxation, and the pleasantest
imaginable stir and commotion. The white flock was cleared from the
platform; a busy throng of gentlemen crowded it instead, making
arrangements for the drawing; and amongst these--the busiest of all--
re-appeared that certain well-known form, not tall but active, alive
with the energy and movement of three tall men. How M. Paul did work!
How he issued directions, and, at the same time, set his own shoulder
to the wheel! Half-a-dozen assistants were at his beck to remove the
pianos, &c.; no matter, he must add to their strength his own. The
redundancy of his alertness was half-vexing, half-ludicrous: in my
mind I both disapproved and derided most of this fuss. Yet, in the
midst of prejudice and annoyance, I could not, while watching, avoid
perceiving a certain not disagreeable naivete in all he did and said;
nor could I be blind to certain vigorous characteristics of his
physiognomy, rendered conspicuous now by the contrast with a throng of
tamer faces: the deep, intent keenness of his eye, the power of his
forehead, pale, broad, and full--the mobility of his most flexible
mouth. He lacked the calm of force, but its movement and its fire he
signally possessed.
Meantime the whole hall was in a stir; most people rose and remained
standing, for a change; some walked about, all talked and laughed. The
crimson compartment presented a peculiarly animated scene. The long
cloud of gentlemen, breaking into fragments, mixed with the rainbow
line of ladies; two or three officer-like men approached the King and
conversed with him. The Queen, leaving her chair, glided along the
rank of young ladies, who all stood up as she passed; and to each in
turn I saw her vouchsafe some token of kindness--a gracious word, look
or smile. To the two pretty English girls, Lady Sara and Ginevra
Fanshawe, she addressed several sentences; as she left them, both, and
especially the latter, seemed to glow all over with gratification.
They were afterwards accosted by several ladies, and a little circle
of gentlemen gathered round them; amongst these--the nearest to
Ginevra--stood the Count de Hamal.
"This room is stiflingly hot," said Dr. Bretton, rising with sudden
impatience. "Lucy--mother--will you come a moment to the fresh air?"
"Go with him, Lucy," said Mrs. Bretton. "I would rather keep my seat."
Willingly would I have kept mine also, but Graham's desire must take
precedence of my own; I accompanied him.
We found the night-air keen; or at least I did: he did not seem to
feel it; but it was very still, and the star-sown sky spread
cloudless. I was wrapped in a fur shawl. We took some turns on the
pavement; in passing under a lamp, Graham encountered my eye.
"You look pensive, Lucy: is it on my account?"
"I was only fearing that you were grieved."
"Not at all: so be of good cheer--as I am. Whenever I die, Lucy, my
persuasion is that it will not be of heart-complaint. I may be stung,
I may seem to droop for a time, but no pain or malady of sentiment has
yet gone through my whole system. You have always seen me cheerful at
home?"
"Generally."
"I am glad she laughed at my mother. I would not give the old lady for
a dozen beauties. That sneer did me all the good in the world. Thank
you, Miss Fanshawe!" And he lifted his hat from his waved locks, and
made a mock reverence.
"Yes," he said, "I thank her. She has made me feel that nine parts in
ten of my heart have always been sound as a bell, and the tenth bled
from a mere puncture: a lancet-prick that will heal in a trice."
"You are angry just now, heated and indignant; you will think and feel
differently to-morrow."
"_I_ heated and indignant! You don't know me. On the contrary,
the heat is gone: I am as cool as the night--which, by the way, may be
too cool for you.