know her, could you name a point in which she is deficient?"
"She does several things very well." ("Flirtation amongst the rest,"
subjoined I, in thought.)
"When do you suppose she will return to town?" he soon inquired.
"Pardon me, Dr. John, I must explain. You honour me too much in
ascribing to me a degree of intimacy with Miss Fanshawe I have not the
felicity to enjoy. I have never been the depositary of her plans and
secrets. You will find her particular friends in another sphere than
mine: amongst the Cholmondeleys, for instance."
He actually thought I was stung with a kind of jealous pain similar to
his own!
"Excuse her," he said; "judge her indulgently; the glitter of fashion
misleads her, but she will soon find out that these people are hollow,
and will return to you with augmented attachment and confirmed trust.
I know something of the Cholmondeleys: superficial, showy, selfish
people; depend on it, at heart Ginevra values you beyond a score of
such."
"You are very kind," I said briefly.
A disclaimer of the sentiments attributed to me burned on my lips, but
I extinguished the flame. I submitted to be looked upon as the
humiliated, cast-off, and now pining confidante of the distinguished
Miss Fanshawe: but, reader, it was a hard submission.
"Yet, you see," continued Graham, "while I comfort _you_, I
cannot take the same consolation to myself; I cannot hope she will do
me justice. De Hamal is most worthless, yet I fear he pleases her:
wretched delusion!"
My patience really gave way, and without notice: all at once. I
suppose illness and weakness had worn it and made it brittle.
"Dr. Bretton," I broke out, "there is no delusion like your own. On
all points but one you are a man, frank, healthful, right-thinking,
clear-sighted: on this exceptional point you are but a slave. I
declare, where Miss Fanshawe is concerned, you merit no respect; nor
have you mine."
I got up, and left the room very much excited.
This little scene took place in the morning; I had to meet him again
in the evening, and then I saw I had done mischief. He was not made of
common clay, not put together out of vulgar materials; while the
outlines of his nature had been shaped with breadth and vigour, the
details embraced workmanship of almost feminine delicacy: finer, much
finer, than you could be prepared to meet with; than you could believe
inherent in him, even after years of acquaintance. Indeed, till some
over-sharp contact with his nerves had betrayed, by its effects, their
acute sensibility, this elaborate construction must be ignored; and
the more especially because the sympathetic faculty was not prominent
in him: to feel, and to seize quickly another's feelings, are separate
properties; a few constructions possess both, some neither. Dr. John
had the one in exquisite perfection; and because I have admitted that
he was not endowed with the other in equal degree, the reader will
considerately refrain from passing to an extreme, and pronouncing him
_un_sympathizing, unfeeling: on the contrary, he was a kind,
generous man. Make your need known, his hand was open. Put your grief
into words, he turned no deaf ear. Expect refinements of perception,
miracles of intuition, and realize disappointment. This night, when
Dr. John entered the room, and met the evening lamp, I saw well and at
one glance his whole mechanism.
To one who had named him "slave," and, on any point, banned him from
respect, he must now have peculiar feelings. That the epithet was well
applied, and the ban just, might be; he put forth no denial that it
was so: his mind even candidly revolved that unmanning possibility. He
sought in this accusation the cause of that ill-success which had got
so galling a hold on his mental peace: Amid the worry of a self-
condemnatory soliloquy, his demeanour seemed grave, perhaps cold, both
to me and his mother. And yet there was no bad feeling, no malice, no
rancour, no littleness in his countenance, beautiful with a man's best
beauty, even in its depression. When I placed his chair at the table,
which I hastened to do, anticipating the servant, and when I handed
him his tea, which I did with trembling care, he said: "Thank you,
Lucy," in as kindly a tone of his full pleasant voice as ever my ear
welcomed.
For my part, there was only one plan to be pursued; I must expiate my
culpable vehemence, or I must not sleep that night. This would not do
at all; I could not stand it: I made no pretence of capacity to wage
war on this footing. School solitude, conventual silence and
stagnation, anything seemed preferable to living embroiled with Dr.
John. As to Ginevra, she might take the silver wings of a dove, or any
other fowl that flies, and mount straight up to the highest place,
among the highest stars, where her lover's highest flight of fancy
chose to fix the constellation of her charms: never more be it mine to
dispute the arrangement. Long I tried to catch his eye. Again and
again that eye just met mine; but, having nothing to say, it withdrew,
and I was baffled. After tea, he sat, sad and quiet, reading a book. I
wished I could have dared to go and sit near him, but it seemed that
if I ventured to take that step, he would infallibly evince hostility
and indignation. I longed to speak out, and I dared not whisper. His
mother left the room; then, moved by insupportable regret, I just
murmured the words "Dr. Bretton."
He looked up from his book; his eyes were not cold or malevolent, his
mouth was not cynical; he was ready and willing to hear what I might
have to say: his spirit was of vintage too mellow and generous to sour
in one thunder-clap.
"Dr. Bretton, forgive my hasty words: _do, do_ forgive them."
He smiled that moment I spoke. "Perhaps I deserved them, Lucy. If you
don't respect me, I am sure it is because I am not respectable. I
fear, I am an awkward fool: I must manage badly in some way, for where
I wish to please, it seems I don't please."
"Of that you cannot be sure; and even if such be the case, is it the
fault of your character, or of another's perceptions? But now, let me
unsay what I said in anger. In one thing, and in all things, I