I
first recognised him on that occasion, noted several chapters back,
when my unguardedly-fixed attention had drawn on me the mortification
of an implied rebuke. Subsequent observation confirmed, in every
point, that early surmise. I traced in the gesture, the port, and the
habits of his manhood, all his boy's promise. I heard in his now deep
tones the accent of former days. Certain turns of phrase, peculiar to
him of old, were peculiar to him still; and so was many a trick of eye
and lip, many a smile, many a sudden ray levelled from the irid, under
his well-charactered brow.
To _say_ anything on the subject, to _hint_ at my discovery,
had not suited my habits of thought, or assimilated with my system of
feeling. On the contrary, I had preferred to keep the matter to
myself. I liked entering his presence covered with a cloud he had not
seen through, while he stood before me under a ray of special
illumination which shone all partial over his head, trembled about his
feet, and cast light no farther.
Well I knew that to him it could make little difference, were I to
come forward and announce, "This is Lucy Snowe!" So I kept back in my
teacher's place; and as he never asked my name, so I never gave it. He
heard me called "Miss," and "Miss Lucy;" he never heard the surname,
"Snowe." As to spontaneous recognition--though I, perhaps, was still
less changed than he--the idea never approached his mind, and why
should I suggest it?
During tea, Dr. John was kind, as it was his nature to be; that meal
over, and the tray carried out, he made a cosy arrangement of the
cushions in a corner of the sofa, and obliged me to settle amongst
them. He and his mother also drew to the fire, and ere we had sat ten
minutes, I caught the eye of the latter fastened steadily upon me.
Women are certainly quicker in some things than men.
"Well," she exclaimed, presently, "I have seldom seen a stronger
likeness! Graham, have you observed it?"
"Observed what? What ails the Old Lady now? How you stare, mamma! One
would think you had an attack of second sight."
"Tell me, Graham, of whom does that young lady remind you?" pointing
to me.
"Mamma, you put her out of countenance. I often tell you abruptness is
your fault; remember, too, that to you she is a stranger, and does not
know your ways."
"Now, when she looks down; now, when she turns sideways, who is she
like, Graham?"
"Indeed, mamma, since you propound the riddle, I think you ought to
solve it!"
"And you have known her some time, you say--ever since you first began
to attend the school in the Rue Fossette:--yet you never mentioned to
me that singular resemblance!"
"I could not mention a thing of which I never thought, and which I do
not now acknowledge. What _can_ you mean?"
"Stupid boy! look at her."
Graham did look: but this was not to be endured; I saw how it must
end, so I thought it best to anticipate.
"Dr. John," I said, "has had so much to do and think of, since he and
I shook hands at our last parting in St. Ann's Street, that, while I
readily found out Mr. Graham Bretton, some months ago, it never
occurred to me as possible that he should recognise Lucy Snowe."
"Lucy Snowe! I thought so! I knew it!" cried Mrs. Bretton. And she at
once stepped across the hearth and kissed me. Some ladies would,
perhaps, have made a great bustle upon such a discovery without being
particularly glad of it; but it was not my godmother's habit to make a
bustle, and she preferred all sentimental demonstrations in bas-
relief. So she and I got over the surprise with few words and a single
salute; yet I daresay she was pleased, and I know I was. While we
renewed old acquaintance, Graham, sitting opposite, silently disposed
of his paroxysm of astonishment.
"Mamma calls me a stupid boy, and I think I am so," at length he said;
"for, upon my honour, often as I have seen you, I never once suspected
this fact: and yet I perceive it all now. Lucy Snowe! To be sure! I
recollect her perfectly, and there she sits; not a doubt of it. But,"
he added, "you surely have not known me as an old acquaintance all
this time, and never mentioned it."
"That I have," was my answer.
Dr. John commented not. I supposed he regarded my silence as
eccentric, but he was indulgent in refraining from censure. I daresay,
too, he would have deemed it impertinent to have interrogated me very
closely, to have asked me the why and wherefore of my reserve; and,
though he might feel a little curious, the importance of the case was
by no means such as to tempt curiosity to infringe on discretion.
For my part, I just ventured to inquire whether he remembered the
circumstance of my once looking at him very fixedly; for the slight
annoyance he had betrayed on that occasion still lingered sore on my
mind.
"I think I do!" said he: "I think I was even cross with you."
"You considered me a little bold; perhaps?" I inquired.
"Not at all. Only, shy and retiring as your general manner was, I
wondered what personal or facial enormity in me proved so magnetic to
your usually averted eyes."
"You see how it was now?"
"Perfectly."
And here Mrs. Bretton broke in with many, many questions about past
times; and for her satisfaction I had to recur to gone-by troubles, to
explain causes of seeming estrangement, to touch on single-handed
conflict with Life, with Death, with Grief, with Fate. Dr. John
listened, saying little. He and she then told me of changes they had
known: even with them all had not gone smoothly, and fortune had
retrenched her once abundant gifts. But so courageous a mother, with
such a champion in her son, was well fitted to fight a good fight with
the world, and to prevail ultimately. Dr. John himself was one of
those on whose birth benign planets have certainly smiled. Adversity
might set against him her most sullen front: he was the man to beat
her down with smiles. Strong and cheerful, and firm and courteous; not
rash, yet valiant; he was the aspirant to woo Destiny herself, and to
win from her stone eyeballs a beam almost loving.
In the profession he