perhaps
on any other that was assailable. Magnificent-minded, grand-hearted,
dear, faulty little man! You deserved candour, and from me always had
it.
Continuing my queries, I asked to whom the house belonged, who was my
landlord, the amount of my rent. He instantly gave me these
particulars in writing; he had foreseen and prepared all things.
The house was not M. Paul's--that I guessed: he was hardly the man to
become a proprietor; I more than suspected in him a lamentable absence
of the saving faculty; he could get, but not keep; he needed a
treasurer. The tenement, then, belonged to a citizen in the Basse-
Ville--a man of substance, M. Paul said; he startled me by adding: "a
friend of yours, Miss Lucy, a person who has a most respectful regard
for you." And, to my pleasant surprise, I found the landlord was none
other than M. Miret, the short-tempered and kind-hearted bookseller,
who had so kindly found me a seat that eventful night in the park. It
seems M. Miret was, in his station, rich, as well as much respected,
and possessed several houses in this faubourg; the rent was moderate,
scarce half of what it would have been for a house of equal size
nearer the centre of Villette.
"And then," observed M. Paul, "should fortune not favour you, though I
think she will, I have the satisfaction to think you are in good
hands; M. Miret will not be extortionate: the first year's rent you
have already in your savings; afterwards Miss Lucy must trust God, and
herself. But now, what will you do for pupils?"
"I must distribute my prospectuses."
"Right! By way of losing no time, I gave one to M. Miret yesterday.
Should you object to beginning with three petite bourgeoises, the
Demoiselles Miret? They are at your service."
"Monsieur, you forget nothing; you are wonderful. Object? It would
become me indeed to object! I suppose I hardly expect at the outset to
number aristocrats in my little day-school; I care not if they never
come. I shall be proud to receive M. Miret's daughters."
"Besides these," pursued he, "another pupil offers, who will come
daily to take lessons in English; and as she is rich, she will pay
handsomely. I mean my god-daughter and ward, Justine Marie Sauveur."
What is in a name?--what in three words? Till this moment I had
listened with living joy--I had answered with gleeful quickness; a
name froze me; three words struck me mute. The effect could not be
hidden, and indeed I scarce tried to hide it.
"What now?" said M. Paul.
"Nothing."
"Nothing! Your countenance changes: your colour and your very eyes
fade. Nothing! You must be ill; you have some suffering; tell me
what."
I had nothing to tell.
He drew his chair nearer. He did not grow vexed, though I continued
silent and icy. He tried to win a word; he entreated with
perseverance, he waited with patience.
"Justine Marie is a good girl," said he, "docile and amiable; not
quick--but you will like her."
"I think not. I think she must not come here."
Such was my speech.
"Do you wish to puzzle me? Do you know her? But, in truth, there
_is_ something. Again you are pale as that statue. Rely on Paul
Carlos; tell him the grief."
His chair touched mine; his hand, quietly advanced, turned me towards
him.
"Do you know Marie Justine?" said he again.
The name re-pronounced by his lips overcame me unaccountably. It did
not prostrate--no, it stirred me up, running with haste and heat
through my veins--recalling an hour of quick pain, many days and
nights of heart-sickness. Near me as he now sat, strongly and closely
as he had long twined his life in mine--far as had progressed, and
near as was achieved our minds' and affections' assimilation--the very
suggestion of interference, of heart-separation, could be heard only
with a fermenting excitement, an impetuous throe, a disdainful
resolve, an ire, a resistance of which no human eye or cheek could
hide the flame, nor any truth-accustomed human tongue curb the cry.
"I want to tell you something," I said: "I want to tell you all."
"Speak, Lucy; come near; speak. Who prizes you, if I do not? Who is
your friend, if not Emanuel? Speak!"
I spoke. All escaped from my lips. I lacked not words now; fast I
narrated; fluent I told my tale; it streamed on my tongue. I went back
to the night in the park; I mentioned the medicated draught--why it
was given--its goading effect--how it had torn rest from under my
head, shaken me from my couch, carried me abroad with the lure of a
vivid yet solemn fancy--a summer-night solitude on turf, under trees,
near a deep, cool lakelet. I told the scene realized; the crowd, the
masques, the music, the lamps, the splendours, the guns booming afar,
the bells sounding on high. All I had encountered I detailed, all I
had recognised, heard, and seen; how I had beheld and watched himself:
how I listened, how much heard, what conjectured; the whole history,
in brief, summoned to his confidence, rushed thither, truthful,
literal, ardent, bitter.
Still as I narrated, instead of checking, he incited me to proceed he
spurred me by the gesture, the smile, the half-word. Before I had half
done, he held both my hands, he consulted my eyes with a most piercing
glance: there was something in his face which tended neither to calm
nor to put me down; he forgot his own doctrine, he forsook his own
system of repression when I most challenged its exercise. I think I
deserved strong reproof; but when have we our deserts? I merited
severity; he looked indulgence. To my very self I seemed imperious and
unreasonable, for I forbade Justine Marie my door and roof; he smiled,
betraying delight. Warm, jealous, and haughty, I knew not till now
that my nature had such a mood: he gathered me near his heart. I was
full of faults; he took them and me all home. For the moment of utmost
mutiny, he reserved the one deep spell of peace. These words caressed
my ear:--
"Lucy, take my love. One day share my life. Be my dearest, first on
earth."
We walked back to the Rue Fossette by moonlight--such moonlight as
fell on Eden--shining through the shades of the Great Garden, and
haply gilding a path glorious for a step divine--a Presence nameless.
Once in their lives some men and women go back to these first fresh
days of our great Sire and Mother--taste