said; "neither you nor another shall persuade or lead me."
"Your bed shall be warmed. Goton is sitting up still. She shall make
you comfortable: she shall give you a sedative."
"Madame," I broke out, "you are a sensualist. Under all your serenity,
your peace, and your decorum, you are an undenied sensualist. Make
your own bed warm and soft; take sedatives and meats, and drinks
spiced and sweet, as much as you will. If you have any sorrow or
disappointment--and, perhaps, you have--nay, I _know_ you have--
seek your own palliatives, in your own chosen resources. Leave me,
however. _Leave me_, I say!"
"I must send another to watch you, Meess: I must send Goton."
"I forbid it. Let me alone. Keep your hand off me, and my life, and my
troubles. Oh, Madame! in _your_ hand there is both chill and
poison. You envenom and you paralyze."
"What have I done, Meess? You must not marry Paul. He cannot marry."
"Dog in the manger!" I said: for I knew she secretly wanted him, and
had always wanted him. She called him "insupportable:" she railed at
him for a "devot:" she did not love, but she wanted to marry, that she
might bind him to her interest. Deep into some of Madame's secrets I
had entered--I know not how: by an intuition or an inspiration which
came to me--I know not whence. In the course of living with her too, I
had slowly learned, that, unless with an inferior, she must ever be a
rival. She was _my_ rival, heart and soul, though secretly, under
the smoothest bearing, and utterly unknown to all save her and myself.
Two minutes I stood over Madame, feeling that the whole woman was in
my power, because in some moods, such as the present--in some
stimulated states of perception, like that of this instant--her
habitual disguise, her mask and her domino, were to me a mere network
reticulated with holes; and I saw underneath a being heartless, self-
indulgent, and ignoble. She quietly retreated from me: meek and self-
possessed, though very uneasy, she said, "If I would not be persuaded
to take rest, she must reluctantly leave me." Which she did
incontinent, perhaps even more glad to get away, than I was to see her
vanish.
This was the sole flash-eliciting, truth-extorting, rencontre which
ever occurred between me and Madame Beck: this short night-scene was
never repeated. It did not one whit change her manner to me. I do not
know that she revenged it. I do not know that she hated me the worse
for my fell candour. I think she bucklered herself with the secret
philosophy of her strong mind, and resolved to forget what it irked
her to remember. I know that to the end of our mutual lives there
occurred no repetition of, no allusion to, that fiery passage.
That night passed: all nights--even the starless night before
dissolution--must wear away. About six o'clock, the hour which called
up the household, I went out to the court, and washed my face in its
cold, fresh well-water. Entering by the carre, a piece of mirror-
glass, set in an oaken cabinet, repeated my image. It said I was
changed: my cheeks and lips were sodden white, my eyes were glassy,
and my eyelids swollen and purple.
On rejoining my companions, I knew they all looked at me--my heart
seemed discovered to them: I believed myself self-betrayed. Hideously
certain did it seem that the very youngest of the school must guess
why and for whom I despaired.
"Isabelle," the child whom I had once nursed in sickness, approached
me. Would she, too, mock me!
"Que vous etes pale! Vous etes donc bien malade, Mademoiselle!" said
she, putting her finger in her mouth, and staring with a wistful
stupidity which at the moment seemed to me more beautiful than the
keenest intelligence.
Isabelle did not long stand alone in the recommendation of ignorance:
before the day was over, I gathered cause of gratitude towards the
whole blind household. The multitude have something else to do than to
read hearts and interpret dark sayings. Who wills, may keep his own
counsel--be his own secret's sovereign. In the course of that day,
proof met me on proof, not only that the cause of my present sorrow
was unguessed, but that my whole inner life for the last six months,
was still mine only. It was not known--it had not been noted--that I
held in peculiar value one life among all lives. Gossip had passed me
by; curiosity had looked me over; both subtle influences, hovering
always round, had never become centred upon me. A given organization
may live in a full fever-hospital, and escape typhus. M. Emanuel had
come and gone: I had been taught and sought; in season and out of
season he had called me, and I had obeyed him: "M. Paul wants Miss
Lucy"--"Miss Lucy is with M. Paul"--such had been the perpetual
bulletin; and nobody commented, far less condemned. Nobody hinted,
nobody jested. Madame Beck read the riddle: none else resolved it.
What I now suffered was called illness--a headache: I accepted the
baptism.
But what bodily illness was ever like this pain? This certainty that
he was gone without a farewell--this cruel conviction that fate and
pursuing furies--a woman's envy and a priest's bigotry--would suffer
me to see him no more? What wonder that the second evening found me
like the first--untamed, tortured, again pacing a solitary room in an
unalterable passion of silent desolation?
Madame Beck did not herself summon me to bed that night--she did not
come near me: she sent Ginevra Fanshawe--a more efficient agent for
the purpose she could not have employed. Ginevra's first words--"Is
your headache very bad to-night?" (for Ginevra, like the rest, thought
I had a headache--an intolerable headache which made me frightfully
white in the face, and insanely restless in the foot)--her first
words, I say, inspired the impulse to flee anywhere, so that it were
only out of reach. And soon, what followed--plaints about her own
headaches--completed the business.
I went up-stairs. Presently I was in my bed--my miserable bed--haunted
with quick scorpions. I had not been laid down five minutes, when
another emissary arrived: Goton came, bringing me something to drink.
I was consumed with thirst--I drank eagerly; the beverage was sweet,
but I tasted a drug.
"Madame says it will make you sleep, chou-chou," said Goton, as she
received back the emptied cup.
Ah! the sedative had been administered. In fact, they had given me a
strong opiate.