similar condition; I might still; in comparison with many
people, be regarded as occupying an enviable position. An embarrassing
one it was, however, at the same time; as I felt with some acuteness
on a certain day, of which the corresponding one in the next week was
to see my departure from my present abode, while with another I was
not provided.
In this dilemma I went, as a last and sole resource, to see and
consult an old servant of our family; once my nurse, now housekeeper
at a grand mansion not far from Miss Marchmont's. I spent some hours
with her; she comforted, but knew not how to advise me. Still all
inward darkness, I left her about twilight; a walk of two miles lay
before me; it was a clear, frosty night. In spite of my solitude, my
poverty, and my perplexity, my heart, nourished and nerved with the
vigour of a youth that had not yet counted twenty-three summers, beat
light and not feebly. Not feebly, I am sure, or I should have trembled
in that lonely walk, which lay through still fields, and passed
neither village nor farmhouse, nor cottage: I should have quailed in
the absence of moonlight, for it was by the leading of stars only I
traced the dim path; I should have quailed still more in the unwonted
presence of that which to-night shone in the north, a moving mystery--
the Aurora Borealis. But this solemn stranger influenced me otherwise
than through my fears. Some new power it seemed to bring. I drew in
energy with the keen, low breeze that blew on its path. A bold thought
was sent to my mind; my mind was made strong to receive it.
"Leave this wilderness," it was said to me, "and go out hence."
"Where?" was the query.
I had not very far to look; gazing from this country parish in that
flat, rich middle of England--I mentally saw within reach what I had
never yet beheld with my bodily eyes: I saw London.
The next day I returned to the hall, and asking once more to see the
housekeeper, I communicated to her my plan.
Mrs. Barrett was a grave, judicious woman, though she knew little more
of the world than myself; but grave and judicious as she was, she did
not charge me with being out of my senses; and, indeed, I had a staid
manner of my own which ere now had been as good to me as cloak and
hood of hodden grey, since under its favour I had been enabled to
achieve with impunity, and even approbation, deeds that, if attempted
with an excited and unsettled air, would in some minds have stamped me
as a dreamer and zealot.
The housekeeper was slowly propounding some difficulties, while she
prepared orange-rind for marmalade, when a child ran past the window
and came bounding into the room. It was a pretty child, and as it
danced, laughing, up to me--for we were not strangers (nor, indeed,
was its mother--a young married daughter of the house--a stranger)--I
took it on my knee.
Different as were our social positions now, this child's mother and I
had been schoolfellows, when I was a girl of ten and she a young lady
of sixteen; and I remembered her, good-looking, but dull, in a lower
class than mine.
I was admiring the boy's handsome dark eyes, when the mother, young
Mrs. Leigh, entered. What a beautiful and kind-looking woman was the
good-natured and comely, but unintellectual, girl become! Wifehood and
maternity had changed her thus, as I have since seen them change
others even less promising than she. Me she had forgotten. I was
changed too, though not, I fear, for the better. I made no attempt to
recall myself to her memory; why should I? She came for her son to
accompany her in a walk, and behind her followed a nurse, carrying an
infant. I only mention the incident because, in addressing the nurse,
Mrs. Leigh spoke French (very bad French, by the way, and with an
incorrigibly bad accent, again forcibly reminding me of our school-
days): and I found the woman was a foreigner. The little boy chattered
volubly in French too. When the whole party were withdrawn, Mrs.
Barrett remarked that her young lady had brought that foreign nurse
home with her two years ago, on her return from a Continental
excursion; that she was treated almost as well as a governess, and had
nothing to do but walk out with the baby and chatter French with
Master Charles; "and," added Mrs. Barrett, "she says there are many
Englishwomen in foreign families as well placed as she."
I stored up this piece of casual information, as careful housewives
store seemingly worthless shreds and fragments for which their
prescient minds anticipate a possible use some day. Before I left my
old friend, she gave me the address of a respectable old-fashioned inn
in the City, which, she said, my uncles used to frequent in former
days.
In going to London, I ran less risk and evinced less enterprise than
the reader may think. In fact, the distance was only fifty miles. My
means would suffice both to take me there, to keep me a few days, and
also to bring me back if I found no inducement to stay. I regarded it
as a brief holiday, permitted for once to work-weary faculties, rather
than as an adventure of life and death. There is nothing like taking
all you do at a moderate estimate: it keeps mind and body tranquil;
whereas grandiloquent notions are apt to hurry both into fever.
Fifty miles were then a day's journey (for I speak of a time gone by:
my hair, which, till a late period, withstood the frosts of time, lies
now, at last white, under a white cap, like snow beneath snow). About
nine o'clock of a wet February night I reached London.
My reader, I know, is one who would not thank me for an elaborate
reproduction of poetic first impressions; and it is well, inasmuch as
I had neither time nor mood to cherish such; arriving as I did late,
on a dark, raw, and rainy evening, in a Babylon and a wilderness, of
which the vastness and the strangeness tried to the utmost any powers
of clear thought and steady self-possession with which, in the absence
of more brilliant faculties, Nature might have gifted me.
When I left the coach, the strange speech