but enhanced the sounds and their impression.
Here were assembled ladies, looking by this light most beautiful: some
of their dresses were gauzy, and some had the sheen of satin, the
flowers and the blond trembled, and the veils waved about their
decorated bonnets, as that host-like chorus, with its greatly-
gathering sound, sundered the air above them. Most of these ladies
occupied the little light park-chairs, and behind and beside them
stood guardian gentlemen. The outer ranks of the crowd were made up of
citizens, plebeians and police.
In this outer rank I took my place. I rather liked to find myself the
silent, unknown, consequently unaccosted neighbour of the short
petticoat and the sabot; and only the distant gazer at the silk robe,
the velvet mantle, and the plumed chapeau. Amidst so much life and
joy, too, it suited me to be alone--quite alone. Having neither wish
nor power to force my way through a mass so close-packed, my station
was on the farthest confines, where, indeed, I might hear, but could
see little.
"Mademoiselle is not well placed," said a voice at my elbow. Who dared
accost _me_, a being in a mood so little social? I turned, rather
to repel than to reply. I saw a man--a burgher--an entire stranger, as
I deemed him for one moment, but the next, recognised in him a certain
tradesman--a bookseller, whose shop furnished the Rue Fossette with
its books and stationery; a man notorious in our pensionnat for the
excessive brittleness of his temper, and frequent snappishness of his
manner, even to us, his principal customers: but whom, for my solitary
self, I had ever been disposed to like, and had always found civil,
sometimes kind; once, in aiding me about some troublesome little
exchange of foreign money, he had done me a service. He was an
intelligent man; under his asperity, he was a good-hearted man; the
thought had sometimes crossed me, that a part of his nature bore
affinity to a part of M. Emanuel's (whom he knew well, and whom I had
often seen sitting on Miret's counter, turning over the current
month's publications); and it was in this affinity I read the
explanation of that conciliatory feeling with which I instinctively
regarded him.
Strange to say, this man knew me under my straw-hat and closely-folded
shawl; and, though I deprecated the effort, he insisted on making a
way for me through the crowd, and finding me a better situation. He
carried his disinterested civility further; and, from some quarter,
procured me a chair. Once and again, I have found that the most cross-
grained are by no means the worst of mankind; nor the humblest in
station, the least polished in feeling. This man, in his courtesy,
seemed to find nothing strange in my being here alone; only a reason
for extending to me, as far as he could, a retiring, yet efficient
attention. Having secured me a place and a seat, he withdrew without
asking a question, without obtruding a remark, without adding a
superfluous word. No wonder that Professor Emanuel liked to take his
cigar and his lounge, and to read his feuilleton in M. Miret's shop--
the two must have suited.
I had not been seated five minutes, ere I became aware that chance and
my worthy burgher friend had brought me once more within view of a
familiar and domestic group. Right before me sat the Brettons and de
Bassompierres. Within reach of my hand--had I chosen to extend it--sat
a figure like a fairy-queen, whose array, lilies and their leaves
seemed to have suggested; whatever was not spotless white, being
forest-green. My godmother, too, sat so near, that, had I leaned
forward, my breath might have stirred the ribbon of her bonnet. They
were too near; having been just recognised by a comparative stranger,
I felt uneasy at this close vicinage of intimate acquaintance.
It made me quite start when Mrs. Bretton, turning to Mr. Home, and
speaking out of a kind impulse of memory, said,--"I wonder what my
steady little Lucy would say to all this if she were here? I wish we
had brought her, she would have enjoyed it much."
"So she would, so she would, in her grave sensible fashion; it is a
pity but we had asked her," rejoined the kind gentleman; and added, "I
like to see her so quietly pleased; so little moved, yet so content."
Dear were they both to me, dear are they to this day in their
remembered benevolence. Little knew they the rack of pain which had
driven Lucy almost into fever, and brought her out, guideless and
reckless, urged and drugged to the brink of frenzy. I had half a mind
to bend over the elders' shoulders, and answer their goodness with the
thanks of my eyes. M. de Bassompierre did not well know _me_, but
I knew _him_, and honoured and admired his nature, with all its
plain sincerity, its warm affection, and unconscious enthusiasm.
Possibly I might have spoken, but just then Graham turned; he turned
with one of his stately firm movements, so different from those, of a
sharp-tempered under-sized man: there was behind him a throng, a
hundred ranks deep; there were thousands to meet his eye and divide
its scrutiny--why then did he concentrate all on me--oppressing me
with the whole force of that full, blue, steadfast orb? Why, if he
_would_ look, did not one glance satisfy him? why did he turn on
his chair, rest his elbow on its back, and study me leisurely? He
could not see my face, I held it down; surely, he _could_ not
recognise me: I stooped, I turned, I _would_ not be known. He
rose, by some means he contrived to approach, in two minutes he would
have had my secret: my identity would have been grasped between his,
never tyrannous, but always powerful hands. There was but one way to
evade or to check him. I implied, by a sort of supplicatory gesture,
that it was my prayer to be let alone; after that, had he persisted,
he would perhaps have seen the spectacle of Lucy incensed: not all
that was grand, or good, or kind in him (and Lucy felt the full
amount) should have kept her quite tame, or absolutely inoffensive and
shadowlike. He looked, but he desisted. He shook his handsome head,
but he was mute. He resumed his seat, nor did he again turn or disturb
me by a glance, except indeed for one