repining; but gaiety expanded
her butterfly's wings, lit up their gold-dust and bright spots, made
her flash like a gem, and flush like a flower. At all ordinary diet
and plain beverage she would pout; but she fed on creams and ices like
a humming-bird on honey-paste: sweet wine was her element, and sweet
cake her daily bread. Ginevra lived her full life in a ball-room;
elsewhere she drooped dispirited.
Think not, reader, that she thus bloomed and sparkled for the mere
sake of M. Paul, her partner, or that she lavished her best graces
that night for the edification of her companions only, or for that of
the parents and grand-parents, who filled the carre, and lined the
ball-room; under circumstances so insipid and limited, with motives so
chilly and vapid, Ginevra would scarce have deigned to walk one
quadrille, and weariness and fretfulness would have replaced animation
and good-humour, but she knew of a leaven in the otherwise heavy
festal mass which lighted the whole; she tasted a condiment which gave
it zest; she perceived reasons justifying the display of her choicest
attractions.
In the ball-room, indeed, not a single male spectator was to be seen
who was not married and a father--M. Paul excepted--that gentleman,
too, being the sole creature of his sex permitted to lead out a pupil
to the dance; and this exceptional part was allowed him, partly as a
matter of old-established custom (for he was a kinsman of Madame
Beck's, and high in her confidence), partly because he would always
have his own way and do as he pleased, and partly because--wilful,
passionate, partial, as he might be--he was the soul of honour, and
might be trusted with a regiment of the fairest and purest; in perfect
security that under his leadership they would come to no harm. Many of
the girls--it may be noted in parenthesis--were not pure-minded at
all, very much otherwise; but they no more dare betray their natural
coarseness in M. Paul's presence, than they dare tread purposely on
his corns, laugh in his face during a stormy apostrophe, or speak
above their breath while some crisis of irritability was covering his
human visage with the mask of an intelligent tiger. M. Paul, then,
might dance with whom he would--and woe be to the interference which
put him out of step.
Others there were admitted as spectators--with (seeming) reluctance,
through prayers, by influence, under restriction, by special and
difficult exercise of Madame Beck's gracious good-nature, and whom she
all the evening--with her own personal surveillance--kept far aloof at
the remotest, drearest, coldest, darkest side of the carre--a small,
forlorn band of "jeunes gens;" these being all of the best families,
grown-up sons of mothers present, and whose sisters were pupils in the
school. That whole evening was Madame on duty beside these "jeunes
gens"--attentive to them as a mother, but strict with them as a
dragon. There was a sort of cordon stretched before them, which they
wearied her with prayers to be permitted to pass, and just to revive
themselves by one dance with that "belle blonde," or that "jolie
brune," or "cette jeune fille magnifique aux cheveux noirs comme le
jais."
"Taisez-vous!" Madame would reply, heroically and inexorably. "Vous ne
passerez pas a moins que ce ne soit sur mon cadavre, et vous ne
danserez qu'avec la nonnette du jardin" (alluding to the legend). And
she majestically walked to and fro along their disconsolate and
impatient line, like a little Bonaparte in a mouse-coloured silk gown.
Madame knew something of the world; Madame knew much of human nature.
I don't think that another directress in Villette would have dared to
admit a "jeune homme" within her walls; but Madame knew that by
granting such admission, on an occasion like the present, a bold
stroke might be struck, and a great point gained.
In the first place, the parents were made accomplices to the deed, for
it was only through their mediation it was brought about. Secondly:
the admission of these rattlesnakes, so fascinating and so dangerous,
served to draw out Madame precisely in her strongest character--that
of a first-rate _surveillante_. Thirdly: their presence furnished
a most piquant ingredient to the entertainment: the pupils knew it,
and saw it, and the view of such golden apples shining afar off,
animated them with a spirit no other circumstance could have kindled.
The children's pleasure spread to the parents; life and mirth
circulated quickly round the ball-room; the "jeunes gens" themselves,
though restrained, were amused: for Madame never permitted them to
feel dull--and thus Madame Beck's fete annually ensured a success
unknown to the fete of any other directress in the land.
I observed that Dr. John was at first permitted to walk at large
through the classes: there was about him a manly, responsible look,
that redeemed his youth, and half-expiated his beauty; but as soon as
the ball began, Madame ran up to him.
"Come, Wolf; come," said she, laughing: "you wear sheep's clothing,
but you must quit the fold notwithstanding. Come; I have a fine
menagerie of twenty here in the carre: let me place you amongst my
collection."
"But first suffer me to have one dance with one pupil of my choice."
"Have you the face to ask such a thing? It is madness: it is impiety.
Sortez, sortez, au plus vite."
She drove him before her, and soon had him enclosed within the cordon.
Ginevra being, I suppose, tired with dancing, sought me out in my
retreat. She threw herself on the bench beside me, and (a
demonstration I could very well have dispensed with) cast her arms
round my neck.
"Lucy Snowe! Lucy Snowe!" she cried in a somewhat sobbing voice, half
hysterical.
"What in the world is the matter?" I drily said.
"How do I look--how do I look to-night?" she demanded.
"As usual," said I; "preposterously vain."
"Caustic creature! You never have a kind word for me; but in spite of
you, and all other envious detractors, I know I am beautiful; I feel
it, I see it--for there is a great looking-glass in the dressing-room,
where I can view my shape from head to foot. Will you go with me now,
and let us two stand before it?"
"I will, Miss Fanshawe: you shall be humoured even to the top of your
bent."
The dressing-room was very near, and we stepped in. Putting her arm
through mine, she drew me to the mirror. Without resistance
remonstrance, or remark, I stood and let her self-love have its feast
and triumph: curious to see how much it