we had that day to submit was such as to make us
very glad when it terminated. At its close, the released, pupils
rushed out, half-trembling, half-exultant. I, too, was going. A
mandate to remain arrested me. I muttered that I wanted some fresh air
sadly--the stove was in a glow, the classe over-heated. An inexorable
voice merely recommended silence; and this salamander--for whom no
room ever seemed too hot--sitting down between my desk and the stove--
a situation in which he ought to have felt broiled, but did not--
proceeded to confront me with--a Greek quotation!
In M. Emanuel's soul rankled a chronic suspicion that I knew both
Greek and Latin. As monkeys are said to have the power of speech if
they would but use it, and are reported to conceal this faculty in
fear of its being turned to their detriment, so to me was ascribed a
fund of knowledge which I was supposed criminally and craftily to
conceal. The privileges of a "classical education," it was insinuated,
had been mine; on flowers of Hymettus I had revelled; a golden store,
hived in memory, now silently sustained my efforts, and privily
nurtured my wits.
A hundred expedients did M. Paul employ to surprise my secret--to
wheedle, to threaten, to startle it out of me. Sometimes he placed
Greek and Latin books in my way, and then watched me, as Joan of Arc's
jailors tempted her with the warrior's accoutrements, and lay in wait
for the issue. Again he quoted I know not what authors and passages,
and while rolling out their sweet and sounding lines (the classic
tones fell musically from his lips--for he had a good voice--
remarkable for compass, modulation, and matchless expression), he
would fix on me a vigilant, piercing, and often malicious eye. It was
evident he sometimes expected great demonstrations; they never
occurred, however; not comprehending, of course I could neither be
charmed nor annoyed.
Baffled--almost angry--he still clung to his fixed idea; my
susceptibilities were pronounced marble--my face a mask. It appeared
as if he could not be brought to accept the homely truth, and take me
for what I was: men, and women too, must have delusion of some sort;
if not made ready to their hand, they will invent exaggeration for
themselves.
At moments I _did_ wish that his suspicions had been better
founded. There were times when I would have given my right hand to
possess the treasures he ascribed to me. He deserved condign
punishment for his testy crotchets. I could have gloried in bringing
home to him his worst apprehensions astoundingly realized. I could
have exulted to burst on his vision, confront and confound his
"lunettes," one blaze of acquirements. Oh! why did nobody undertake to
make me clever while I was young enough to learn, that I might, by one
grand, sudden, inhuman revelation--one cold, cruel, overwhelming
triumph--have for ever crushed the mocking spirit out of Paul Carl
David Emanuel!
Alas! no such feat was in my power. To-day, as usual, his quotations
fell ineffectual: he soon shifted his ground.
"Women of intellect" was his next theme: here he was at home. A "woman
of intellect," it appeared, was a sort of "lusus naturae," a luckless
accident, a thing for which there was neither place nor use in
creation, wanted neither as wife nor worker. Beauty anticipated her in
the first office. He believed in his soul that lovely, placid, and
passive feminine mediocrity was the only pillow on which manly thought
and sense could find rest for its aching temples; and as to work, male
mind alone could work to any good practical result--hein?
This "hein?" was a note of interrogation intended to draw from me
contradiction or objection. However, I only said--"Cela ne me regarde
pas: je ne m'en soucie pas;" and presently added--"May I go, Monsieur?
They have rung the bell for the second dejeuner" (_i.e._ luncheon).
"What of that? You are not hungry?"
"Indeed I was," I said; "I had had nothing since breakfast, at seven,
and should have nothing till dinner, at five, if I missed this bell."
"Well, he was in the same plight, but I might share with him."
And he broke in two the "brioche" intended for his own refreshment,
and gave me half. Truly his bark was worse than his bite; but the
really formidable attack was yet to come. While eating his cake, I
could not forbear expressing my secret wish that I really knew all of
which he accused me.
"Did I sincerely feel myself to be an ignoramus?" he asked, in a
softened tone.
If I had replied meekly by an unqualified affirmative, I believe he
would have stretched out his hand, and we should have been friends on
the spot, but I answered--
"Not exactly. I am ignorant, Monsieur, in the knowledge you ascribe to
me, but I _sometimes_, not _always_, feel a knowledge of my
own."
"What did I mean?" he inquired, sharply.
Unable to answer this question in a breath, I evaded it by change of
subject. He had now finished his half of the brioche feeling sure that
on so trifling a fragment he could not have satisfied his appetite, as
indeed I had not appeased mine, and inhaling the fragrance of baked
apples afar from the refectory, I ventured to inquire whether he did
not also perceive that agreeable odour. He confessed that he did. I
said if he would let me out by the garden-door, and permit me just to
run across the court, I would fetch him a plateful; and added that I
believed they were excellent, as Goton had a very good method of
baking, or rather stewing fruit, putting in a little spice, sugar, and
a glass or two of vin blanc--might I go?
"Petite gourmande!" said he, smiling, "I have not forgotten how
pleased you were with the pate a la creme I once gave you, and you
know very well, at this moment, that to fetch the apples for me will
be the same as getting them for yourself. Go, then, but come back
quickly."
And at last he liberated me on parole. My own plan was to go and
return with speed and good faith, to put the plate in at the door, and
then to vanish incontinent, leaving all consequences for future
settlement.
That intolerably keen instinct of his seemed to have anticipated my
scheme: he met me at the threshold, hurried me into the room, and
fixed me in a minute in my former seat. Taking the plate of fruit