this day,
especially doomed--the main burden and trial falling on me alone of
all the female teachers. The others were not expected to examine in
the studies they taught; the professor of literature, M. Paul, taking
upon himself this duty. He, this school autocrat, gathered all and
sundry reins into the hollow of his one hand; he irefully rejected any
colleague; he would not have help. Madame herself, who evidently
rather wished to undertake the examination in geography--her favourite
study, which she taught well--was forced to succumb, and be
subordinate to her despotic kinsman's direction. The whole staff of
instructors, male and female, he set aside, and stood on the
examiner's estrade alone. It irked him that he was forced to make one
exception to this rule. He could not manage English: he was obliged to
leave that branch of education in the English teacher's hands; which
he did, not without a flash of naive jealousy.
A constant crusade against the "amour-propre" of every human being but
himself, was the crotchet of this able, but fiery and grasping little
man. He had a strong relish for public representation in his own
person, but an extreme abhorrence of the like display in any other. He
quelled, he kept down when he could; and when he could not, he fumed
like a bottled storm.
On the evening preceding the examination-day, I was walking in the
garden, as were the other teachers and all the boarders. M. Emanuel
joined me in the "allee defendue;" his cigar was at his lips; his
paletot--a most characteristic garment of no particular shape--hung
dark and menacing; the tassel of his bonnet grec sternly shadowed his
left temple; his black whiskers curled like those of a wrathful cat;
his blue eye had a cloud in its glitter.
"Ainsi," he began, abruptly fronting and arresting me, "vous allez
troner comme une reine; demain--troner a mes cotes? Sans doute vous
savourez d'avance les delices de l'autorite. Je crois voir en je ne
sais quoi de rayonnante, petite ambitieuse!"
Now the fact was, he happened to be entirely mistaken. I did not--
could not--estimate the admiration or the good opinion of tomorrow's
audience at the same rate he did. Had that audience numbered as many
personal friends and acquaintance for me as for him, I know not how it
might have been: I speak of the case as it stood. On me school-
triumphs shed but a cold lustre. I had wondered--and I wondered now--
how it was that for him they seemed to shine as with hearth-warmth
and hearth-glow. _He_ cared for them perhaps too much; _I_,
probably, too little. However, I had my own fancies as well as he. I
liked, for instance, to see M. Emanuel jealous; it lit up his nature,
and woke his spirit; it threw all sorts of queer lights and shadows
over his dun face, and into his violet-azure eyes (he used to say that
his black hair and blue eyes were "une de ses beautes"). There was a
relish in his anger; it was artless, earnest, quite unreasonable, but
never hypocritical. I uttered no disclaimer then of the complacency he
attributed to me; I merely asked where the English examination came
in--whether at the commencement or close of the day?
"I hesitate," said he, "whether at the very beginning, before many
persons are come, and when your aspiring nature will not be gratified
by a large audience, or quite at the close, when everybody is tired,
and only a jaded and worn-out attention will be at your service."
"Que vous etes dur, Monsieur!" I said, affecting dejection.
"One ought to be 'dur' with you. You are one of those beings who must
be _kept down_. I know you! I know you! Other people in this
house see you pass, and think that a colourless shadow has gone by. As
for me, I scrutinized your face once, and it sufficed."
"You are satisfied that you understand me?"
Without answering directly, he went on, "Were you not gratified when
you succeeded in that vaudeville? I watched you and saw a passionate
ardour for triumph in your physiognomy. What fire shot into the
glance! Not mere light, but flame: je me tiens pour averti."
"What feeling I had on that occasion, Monsieur--and pardon me, if I
say, you immensely exaggerate both its quality and quantity--was quite
abstract. I did not care for the vaudeville. I hated the part you
assigned me. I had not the slightest sympathy with the audience below
the stage. They are good people, doubtless, but do I know them? Are
they anything to me? Can I care for being brought before their view
again to-morrow? Will the examination be anything but a task to me--a
task I wish well over?"
"Shall I take it out of your hands?"
"With all my heart; if you do not fear failure."
"But I should fail. I only know three phrases of English, and a few
words: par exemple, de sonn, de mone, de stares--est-ce bien dit? My
opinion is that it would be better to give up the thing altogether: to
have no English examination, eh?"
"If Madame consents, I consent."
"Heartily?"
"Very heartily."
He smoked his cigar in silence. He turned suddenly.
"Donnez-moi la main," said he, and the spite and jealousy melted out
of his face, and a generous kindliness shone there instead.
"Come, we will not be rivals, we will be friends," he pursued. "The
examination shall take place, and I will choose a good moment; and
instead of vexing and hindering, as I felt half-inclined ten minutes
ago--for I have my malevolent moods: I always had from childhood--I
will aid you sincerely. After all, you are solitary and a stranger,
and have your way to make and your bread to earn; it may be well that
you should become known. We will be friends: do you agree?"
"Out of my heart, Monsieur. I am glad of a friend. I like that better
than a triumph."
"Pauvrette?" said he, and turned away and left the alley.
The examination passed over well; M. Paul was as good as his word, and
did his best to make my part easy. The next day came the distribution
of prizes; that also passed; the school broke up; the pupils went
home, and now began the long vacation.
That vacation! Shall I ever forget it? I think not. Madame Beck went,
the first day of the holidays, to join her children at the sea-side;
all the three teachers had parents or friends with whom they took
refuge;