to pass,
or accept the coin with which you would cheat him. Offer to the
strongest--if the darkest angel of God's host--water, when he has
asked blood--will he take it? Not a whole pale sea for one red drop. I
settled another account.
Pausing before Methusaleh--the giant and patriarch of the garden--and
leaning my brow against his knotty trunk, my foot rested on the stone
sealing the small sepulchre at his root; and I recalled the passage of
feeling therein buried; I recalled Dr. John; my warm affection for
him; my faith in his excellence; my delight in his grace. What was
become of that curious one-sided friendship which was half marble and
half life; only on one hand truth, and on the other perhaps a jest?
Was this feeling dead? I do not know, but it was buried. Sometimes I
thought the tomb unquiet, and dreamed strangely of disturbed earth,
and of hair, still golden, and living, obtruded through coffin-chinks.
Had I been too hasty? I used to ask myself; and this question would
occur with a cruel sharpness after some brief chance interview with
Dr. John. He had still such kind looks, such a warm hand; his voice
still kept so pleasant a tone for my name; I never liked "Lucy" so
well as when he uttered it. But I learned in time that this benignity,
this cordiality, this music, belonged in no shape to me: it was a part
of himself; it was the honey of his temper; it was the balm of his
mellow mood; he imparted it, as the ripe fruit rewards with sweetness
the rifling bee; he diffused it about him, as sweet plants shed their
perfume. Does the nectarine love either the bee or bird it feeds? Is
the sweetbriar enamoured of the air?
"Good-night, Dr. John; you are good, you are beautiful; but you are
not mine. Good-night, and God bless you!"
Thus I closed my musings. "Good-night" left my lips in sound; I heard
the words spoken, and then I heard an echo--quite close.
"Good-night, Mademoiselle; or, rather, good-evening--the sun is scarce
set; I hope you slept well?"
I started, but was only discomposed a moment; I knew the voice and
speaker.
"Slept, Monsieur! When? where?"
"You may well inquire when--where. It seems you turn day into night,
and choose a desk for a pillow; rather hard lodging--?"
"It was softened for me, Monsieur, while I slept. That unseen, gift-
bringing thing which haunts my desk, remembered me. No matter how I
fell asleep; I awoke pillowed and covered."
"Did the shawls keep you warm?"
"Very warm. Do you ask thanks for them?"
"No. You looked pale in your slumbers: are you home-sick?"
"To be home-sick, one must have a home; which I have not."
"Then you have more need of a careful friend. I scarcely know any one,
Miss Lucy, who needs a friend more absolutely than you; your very
faults imperatively require it. You want so much checking, regulating,
and keeping down."
This idea of "keeping down" never left M. Paul's head; the most
habitual subjugation would, in my case, have failed to relieve him of
it. No matter; what did it signify? I listened to him, and did not
trouble myself to be too submissive; his occupation would have been
gone had I left him nothing to "keep down."
"You need watching, and watching over," he pursued; "and it is well
for you that I see this, and do my best to discharge both duties. I
watch you and others pretty closely, pretty constantly, nearer and
oftener than you or they think. Do you see that window with a light in
it?"
He pointed to a lattice in one of the college boarding-houses.
"That," said he, "is a room I have hired, nominally for a study--
virtually for a post of observation. There I sit and read for hours
together: it is my way--my taste. My book is this garden; its contents
are human nature--female human nature. I know you all by heart. Ah! I
know you well--St. Pierre, the Parisienne--cette maitresse-femme, my
cousin Beck herself."
"It is not right, Monsieur."
"Comment? it is not right? By whose creed? Does some dogma of Calvin
or Luther condemn it? What is that to me? I am no Protestant. My rich
father (for, though I have known poverty, and once starved for a year
in a garret in Rome--starved wretchedly, often on a meal a day, and
sometimes not that--yet I was born to wealth)--my rich father was a
good Catholic; and he gave me a priest and a Jesuit for a tutor. I
retain his lessons; and to what discoveries, grand Dieu! have they not
aided me!"
"Discoveries made by stealth seem to me dishonourable discoveries."
"Puritaine! I doubt it not. Yet see how my Jesuit's system works. You
know the St. Pierre?"
"Partially."
He laughed. "You say right--_'partially'_; whereas _I_ know
her _thoroughly_; there is the difference. She played before me
the amiable; offered me patte de velours; caressed, flattered, fawned
on me. Now, I am accessible to a woman's flattery--accessible against
my reason. Though never pretty, she was--when I first knew her--young,
or knew how to look young. Like all her countrywomen, she had the art
of dressing--she had a certain cool, easy, social assurance, which
spared me the pain of embarrassment--"
"Monsieur, that must have been unnecessary. I never saw you
embarrassed in my life."
"Mademoiselle, you know little of me; I can be embarrassed as a petite
pensionnaire; there is a fund of modesty and diffidence in my nature--"
"Monsieur, I never saw it."
"Mademoiselle, it is there. You ought to have seen it."
"Monsieur, I have observed you in public--on platforms, in tribunes,
before titles and crowned heads--and you were as easy as you are in
the third division."
"Mademoiselle, neither titles nor crowned heads excite my modesty; and
publicity is very much my element. I like it well, and breathe in it
quite freely;--but--but, in short, here is the sentiment brought into
action, at this very moment; however, I disdain to be worsted by it.
If, Mademoiselle, I were a marrying man (which I am not; and you may
spare yourself the trouble of any sneer you may be contemplating at
the thought), and found it necessary to ask a lady whether she could
look upon me in the light of a future husband, then would it be proved
that I am as I say--modest"
I quite believed him now; and, in believing, I honoured him with a
sincerity of esteem which made my heart ache.
"As to the