wait till their respective servants arrive
to fetch them." And the school dispersed, for it was four o'clock.
"Monsieur, a word," said Mdlle. Reuter, stepping on to the estrade, and
signifying, by a movement of the hand, that she wished me to relinquish,
for an instant, the castor I had clutched.
"Mademoiselle, I am at your service."
"Monsieur, it is of course an excellent plan to encourage effort in
young people by making conspicuous the progress of any particularly
industrious pupil; but do you not think that in the present instance,
Mdlle. Henri can hardly be considered as a concurrent with the other
pupils? She is older than most of them, and has had advantages of an
exclusive nature for acquiring a knowledge of English; on the other
hand, her sphere of life is somewhat beneath theirs; under these
circumstances, a public distinction, conferred upon Mdlle. Henri, may be
the means of suggesting comparisons, and exciting feelings such as would
be far from advantageous to the individual forming their object. The
interest I take in Mdlle. Henri's real welfare makes me desirous of
screening her from annoyances of this sort; besides, monsieur, as I
have before hinted to you, the sentiment of AMOUR-PROPRE has a somewhat
marked preponderance in her character; celebrity has a tendency to
foster this sentiment, and in her it should be rather repressed--she
rather needs keeping down than bringing forward; and then I think,
monsieur--it appears to me that ambition, LITERARY ambition especially,
is not a feeling to be cherished in the mind of a woman: would not
Mdlle. Henri be much safer and happier if taught to believe that in the
quiet discharge of social duties consists her real vocation, than if
stimulated to aspire after applause and publicity? She may never marry;
scanty as are her resources, obscure as are her connections, uncertain
as is her health (for I think her consumptive, her mother died of that
complaint), it is more than probable she never will. I do not see how
she can rise to a position, whence such a step would be possible; but
even in celibacy it would be better for her to retain the character and
habits of a respectable decorous female."
"Indisputably, mademoiselle," was my answer. "Your opinion admits of no
doubt;" and, fearful of the harangue being renewed, I retreated under
cover of that cordial sentence of assent.
At the date of a fortnight after the little incident noted above, I find
it recorded in my diary that a hiatus occurred in Mdlle. Henri's usually
regular attendance in class. The first day or two I wondered at her
absence, but did not like to ask an explanation of it; I thought indeed
some chance word might be dropped which would afford me the information
I wished to obtain, without my running the risk of exciting silly smiles
and gossiping whispers by demanding it. But when a week passed and
the seat at the desk near the door still remained vacant, and when
no allusion was made to the circumstance by any individual of the
class--when, on the contrary, I found that all observed a marked silence
on the point--I determined, COUTE QUI COUTE, to break the ice of this
silly reserve. I selected Sylvie as my informant, because from her I
knew that I should at least get a sensible answer, unaccompanied by
wriggle, titter, or other flourish of folly.
"Ou donc est Mdlle. Henri?" I said one day as I returned an
exercise-book I had been examining.
"Elle est partie, monsieur."
"Partie? et pour combien de temps? Quand reviendra-t-elle?"
"Elle est partie pour toujours, monsieur; elle ne reviendra plus."
"Ah!" was my involuntary exclamation; then after a pause:--
"En etes-vous bien sure, Sylvie?"
"Oui, oui, monsieur, mademoiselle la directrice nous l'a dit elle-meme
il y a deux ou trois jours."
And I could pursue my inquiries no further; time, place, and
circumstances forbade my adding another word. I could neither comment on
what had been said, nor demand further particulars. A question as to the
reason of the teacher's departure, as to whether it had been voluntary
or otherwise, was indeed on my lips, but I suppressed it--there were
listeners all round. An hour after, in passing Sylvie in the corridor as
she was putting on her bonnet, I stopped short and asked:--
"Sylvie, do you know Mdlle. Henri's address? I have some books of hers,"
I added carelessly, "and I should wish to send them to her."
"No, monsieur," replied Sylvie; "but perhaps Rosalie, the portress, will
be able to give it you."
Rosalie's cabinet was just at hand; I stepped in and repeated the
inquiry. Rosalie--a smart French grisette--looked up from her work with
a knowing smile, precisely the sort of smile I had been so desirous to
avoid exciting. Her answer was prepared; she knew nothing whatever
of Mdlle. Henri's address--had never known it. Turning from her with
impatience--for I believed she lied and was hired to lie--I almost
knocked down some one who had been standing at my back; it was the
directress. My abrupt movement made her recoil two or three steps. I was
obliged to apologize, which I did more concisely than politely. No man
likes to be dogged, and in the very irritable mood in which I then
was the sight of Mdlle. Reuter thoroughly incensed me. At the moment I
turned her countenance looked hard, dark, and inquisitive; her eyes
were bent upon me with an expression of almost hungry curiosity. I had
scarcely caught this phase of physiognomy ere it had vanished; a
bland smile played on her features; my harsh apology was received with
good-humoured facility.
"Oh, don't mention it, monsieur; you only touched my hair with your
elbow; it is no worse, only a little dishevelled." She shook it back,
and passing her fingers through her curls, loosened them into more
numerous and flowing ringlets. Then she went on with vivacity:
"Rosalie, I was coming to tell you to go instantly and close the windows
of the salon; the wind is rising, and the muslin curtains will be
covered with dust."
Rosalie departed. "Now," thought I, "this will not do; Mdlle. Reuter
thinks her meanness in eaves-dropping is screened by her art in devising
a pretext, whereas the muslin curtains she speaks of are not more
transparent than this same pretext." An impulse came over me to thrust
the flimsy screen aside, and confront her craft boldly with a word or
two of plain truth. "The rough-shod foot treads most firmly on slippery
ground," thought I;