put his veto upon such a proceeding. 'Now, mamma,'
he said, when he went out, 'take notice, you are not to knock up your
god-daughter with gossip,' and he particularly desired me to keep
close to my own quarters, and spare you my fine company. He says,
Lucy, he thinks you have had a nervous fever, judging from your look,
--is that so?"
I replied that I did not quite know what my ailment had been, but that
I had certainly suffered a good deal especially in mind. Further, on
this subject, I did not consider it advisable to dwell, for the
details of what I had undergone belonged to a portion of my existence
in which I never expected my godmother to take a share. Into what a
new region would such a confidence have led that hale, serene nature!
The difference between her and me might be figured by that between the
stately ship cruising safe on smooth seas, with its full complement of
crew, a captain gay and brave, and venturous and provident; and the
life-boat, which most days of the year lies dry and solitary in an
old, dark boat-house, only putting to sea when the billows run high in
rough weather, when cloud encounters water, when danger and death
divide between them the rule of the great deep. No, the "Louisa
Bretton" never was out of harbour on such a night, and in such a
scene: her crew could not conceive it; so the half-drowned life-boat
man keeps his own counsel, and spins no yarns.
She left me, and I lay in bed content: it was good of Graham to
remember me before he went out.
My day was lonely, but the prospect of coming evening abridged and
cheered it. Then, too, I felt weak, and rest seemed welcome; and after
the morning hours were gone by,--those hours which always bring, even
to the necessarily unoccupied, a sense of business to be done, of
tasks waiting fulfilment, a vague impression of obligation to be
employed--when this stirring time was past, and the silent descent of
afternoon hushed housemaid steps on the stairs and in the chambers, I
then passed into a dreamy mood, not unpleasant.
My calm little room seemed somehow like a cave in the sea. There was
no colour about it, except that white and pale green, suggestive of
foam and deep water; the blanched cornice was adorned with shell-
shaped ornaments, and there were white mouldings like dolphins in the
ceiling-angles. Even that one touch of colour visible in the red satin
pincushion bore affinity to coral; even that dark, shining glass might
have mirrored a mermaid. When I closed my eyes, I heard a gale,
subsiding at last, bearing upon the house-front like a settling swell
upon a rock-base. I heard it drawn and withdrawn far, far off, like a
tide retiring from a shore of the upper world--a world so high above
that the rush of its largest waves, the dash of its fiercest breakers,
could sound down in this submarine home, only like murmurs and a
lullaby.
Amidst these dreams came evening, and then Martha brought a light;
with her aid I was quickly dressed, and stronger now than in the
morning, I made my way down to the blue saloon unassisted.
Dr. John, it appears, had concluded his round of professional calls
earlier than usual; his form was the first object that met my eyes as
I entered the parlour; he stood in that window-recess opposite the
door, reading the close type of a newspaper by such dull light as
closing day yet gave. The fire shone clear, but the lamp stood on the
table unlit, and tea was not yet brought up.
As to Mrs. Bretton, my active godmother--who, I afterwards found, had
been out in the open air all day--lay half-reclined in her deep-
cushioned chair, actually lost in a nap. Her son seeing me, came
forward. I noticed that he trod carefully, not to wake the sleeper; he
also spoke low: his mellow voice never had any sharpness in it;
modulated as at present, it was calculated rather to soothe than
startle slumber.
"This is a quiet little chateau," he observed, after inviting me to
sit near the casement. "I don't know whether you may have noticed it
in your walks: though, indeed, from the chaussee it is not visible;
just a mile beyond the Porte de Crecy, you turn down a lane which soon
becomes an avenue, and that leads you on, through meadow and shade, to
the very door of this house. It is not a modern place, but built
somewhat in the old style of the Basse-Ville. It is rather a manoir
than a chateau; they call it 'La Terrasse,' because its front rises
from a broad turfed walk, whence steps lead down a grassy slope to the
avenue. See yonder! The moon rises: she looks well through the tree-
boles."
Where, indeed, does the moon not look well? What is the scene,
confined or expansive, which her orb does not hallow? Rosy or fiery,
she mounted now above a not distant bank; even while we watched her
flushed ascent, she cleared to gold, and in very brief space, floated
up stainless into a now calm sky. Did moonlight soften or sadden Dr.
Bretton? Did it touch him with romance? I think it did. Albeit of no
sighing mood, he sighed in watching it: sighed to himself quietly. No
need to ponder the cause or the course of that sigh; I knew it was
wakened by beauty; I knew it pursued Ginevra. Knowing this, the idea
pressed upon me that it was in some sort my duty to speak the name he
meditated. Of course he was ready for the subject: I saw in his
countenance a teeming plenitude of comment, question and interest; a
pressure of language and sentiment, only checked, I thought, by sense
of embarrassment how to begin. To spare him this embarrassment was my
best, indeed my sole use. I had but to utter the idol's name, and
love's tender litany would flow out. I had just found a fitting
phrase, "You know that Miss Fanshawe is gone on a tour with the
Cholmondeleys," and was opening my lips to speak to it, when he
scattered my plans by introducing another theme.
"The first thing this morning," said he, putting his sentiment in his
pocket, turning from the moon, and sitting down, "I went to the Rue
Fossette, and told the