in
the room?--my mother, for instance; or the lions yonder, Messieurs
A---- and Z----; or, let us say, that pale little lady, Miss de
Bassompierre?"
"You know what I think of your mother. I have not thought of Messieurs
A---- and Z----."
"And the other?"
"I think she is, as you say, a pale little lady--pale, certainly, just
now, when she is fatigued with over-excitement."
"You don't remember her as a child?"
"I wonder, sometimes, whether you do."
"I had forgotten her; but it is noticeable, that circumstances,
persons, even words and looks, that had slipped your memory, may,
under certain conditions, certain aspects of your own or another's
mind, revive."
"That is possible enough."
"Yet," he continued, "the revival is imperfect--needs confirmation,
partakes so much of the dim character of a dream, or of the airy one
of a fancy, that the testimony of a witness becomes necessary for
corroboration. Were you not a guest at Bretton ten years ago, when Mr.
Home brought his little girl, whom we then called 'little Polly,' to
stay with mamma?"
"I was there the night she came, and also the morning she went away."
"Rather a peculiar child, was she not? I wonder how I treated her. Was
I fond of children in those days? Was there anything gracious or
kindly about me--great, reckless, schoolboy as I was? But you don't
recollect me, of course?"
"You have seen your own picture at La Terrasse. It is like you
personally. In manner, you were almost the same yesterday as to-day."
"But, Lucy, how is that? Such an oracle really whets my curiosity.
What am I to-day? What was I the yesterday of ten years back?"
"Gracious to whatever pleased you--unkindly or cruel to nothing."
"There you are wrong; I think I was almost a brute to _you_, for
instance."
"A brute! No, Graham: I should never have patiently endured
brutality."
"_This_, however, I _do_ remember: quiet Lucy Snowe tasted
nothing of my grace."
"As little of your cruelty."
"Why, had I been Nero himself, I could not have tormented a being
inoffensive as a shadow."
I smiled; but I also hushed a groan. Oh!--I just wished he would let
me alone--cease allusion to me. These epithets--these attributes I put
from me. His "quiet Lucy Snowe," his "inoffensive shadow," I gave him
back; not with scorn, but with extreme weariness: theirs was the
coldness and the pressure of lead; let him whelm me with no such
weight. Happily, he was soon on another theme.
"On what terms were 'little Polly' and I? Unless my recollections
deceive me, we were not foes--"
"You speak very vaguely. Do you think little Polly's memory, not more
definite?"
"Oh! we don't talk of 'little Polly' _now_. Pray say, Miss de
Bassompierre; and, of course, such a stately personage remembers
nothing of Bretton. Look at her large eyes, Lucy; can they read a word
in the page of memory? Are they the same which I used to direct to a
horn-book? She does not know that I partly taught her to read."
"In the Bible on Sunday nights?"
"She has a calm, delicate, rather fine profile now: once what a little
restless, anxious countenance was hers! What a thing is a child's
preference--what a bubble! Would you believe it? that lady was fond of
me!"
"I think she was in some measure fond of you," said I, moderately.
"You don't remember then? _I_ had forgotten; but I remember
_now_. She liked me the best of whatever there was at Bretton."
"You thought so."
"I quite well recall it. I wish I could tell her all I recall; or
rather, I wish some one, you for instance, would go behind and whisper
it all in her ear, and I could have the delight--here, as I sit--of
watching her look under the intelligence. Could you manage that, think
you, Lucy, and make me ever grateful?"
"Could I manage to make you ever grateful?" said I. "No, _I could
not_." And I felt my fingers work and my hands interlock: I felt,
too, an inward courage, warm and resistant. In this matter I was not
disposed to gratify Dr. John: not at all. With now welcome force, I
realized his entire misapprehension of my character and nature. He
wanted always to give me a role not mine. Nature and I opposed him. He
did not at all guess what I felt: he did not read my eyes, or face, or
gestures; though, I doubt not, all spoke. Leaning towards me
coaxingly, he said, softly, "_Do_ content me, Lucy."
And I would have contented, or, at least, I would clearly have
enlightened him, and taught him well never again to expect of me the
part of officious soubrette in a love drama; when, following his,
soft, eager, murmur, meeting almost his pleading, mellow--"_Do_
content me, Lucy!" a sharp hiss pierced my ear on the other side.
"Petite chatte, doucerette, coquette!" sibillated the sudden boa-
constrictor; "vous avez l'air bien triste, soumis, reveur, mais vous
ne l'etes pas: c'est moi qui vous le dis: Sauvage! la flamme a l'ame,
l'eclair aux yeux!"
"Oui; j'ai la flamme a l'ame, et je dois l'avoir!" retorted I, turning
in just wrath: but Professor Emanuel had hissed his insult and was
gone.
The worst of the matter was, that Dr. Bretton, whose ears, as I have
said, were quick and fine, caught every word of this apostrophe; he
put his handkerchief to his face, and laughed till he shook.
"Well done, Lucy," cried he; "capital! petite chatte, petite coquette!
Oh, I must tell my mother! Is it true, Lucy, or half-true? I believe
it is: you redden to the colour of Miss Fanshawe's gown. And really,
by my word, now I examine him, that is the same little man who was so
savage with you at the concert: the very same, and in his soul he is
frantic at this moment because he sees me laughing. Oh! I must tease
him."
And Graham, yielding to his bent for mischief, laughed, jested, and
whispered on till I could bear no more, and my eyes filled.
Suddenly he was sobered: a vacant space appeared near Miss de
Bassompierre; the circle surrounding her seemed about to dissolve.
This movement was instantly caught by Graham's eye--ever-vigilant,
even while laughing; he rose, took his courage in both hands, crossed
the room, and made the advantage his own. Dr. John, throughout his
whole life, was a man of luck--a man of success. And why? Because he
had the eye to see his opportunity, the heart to prompt to well-timed
action, the nerve to consummate