from under her rod and give a truant hour to
Imagination--_her_ soft, bright foe, _our_ sweet Help, our divine
Hope. We shall and must break bounds at intervals, despite the
terrible revenge that awaits our return. Reason is vindictive as a
devil: for me she was always envenomed as a step-mother. If I have
obeyed her it has chiefly been with the obedience of fear, not of
love. Long ago I should have died of her ill-usage her stint, her
chill, her barren board, her icy bed, her savage, ceaseless blows; but
for that kinder Power who holds my secret and sworn allegiance. Often
has Reason turned me out by night, in mid-winter, on cold snow,
flinging for sustenance the gnawed bone dogs had forsaken: sternly has
she vowed her stores held nothing more for me--harshly denied my right
to ask better things.... Then, looking up, have I seen in the sky a
head amidst circling stars, of which the midmost and the brightest
lent a ray sympathetic and attent. A spirit, softer and better than
Human Reason, has descended with quiet flight to the waste--bringing
all round her a sphere of air borrowed of eternal summer; bringing
perfume of flowers which cannot fade--fragrance of trees whose fruit
is life; bringing breezes pure from a world whose day needs no sun to
lighten it. My hunger has this good angel appeased with food, sweet
and strange, gathered amongst gleaning angels, garnering their dew-
white harvest in the first fresh hour of a heavenly day; tenderly has
she assuaged the insufferable fears which weep away life itself--
kindly given rest to deadly weariness--generously lent hope and
impulse to paralyzed despair. Divine, compassionate, succourable
influence! When I bend the knee to other than God, it shall be at thy
white and winged feet, beautiful on mountain or on plain. Temples have
been reared to the Sun--altars dedicated to the Moon. Oh, greater
glory! To thee neither hands build, nor lips consecrate: but hearts,
through ages, are faithful to thy worship. A dwelling thou hast, too
wide for walls, too high for dome--a temple whose floors are space--
rites whose mysteries transpire in presence, to the kindling, the
harmony of worlds!
Sovereign complete! thou hadst, for endurance, thy great army of
martyrs; for achievement, thy chosen band of worthies. Deity
unquestioned, thine essence foils decay!
This daughter of Heaven remembered me to-night; she saw me weep, and
she came with comfort: "Sleep," she said. "Sleep, sweetly--I gild thy
dreams!"
She kept her word, and watched me through a night's rest; but at dawn
Reason relieved the guard. I awoke with a sort of start; the rain was
dashing against the panes, and the wind uttering a peevish cry at
intervals; the night-lamp was dying on the black circular stand in the
middle of the dormitory: day had already broken. How I pity those whom
mental pain stuns instead of rousing! This morning the pang of waking
snatched me out of bed like a hand with a giant's gripe. How quickly I
dressed in the cold of the raw dawn! How deeply I drank of the ice-
cold water in my carafe! This was always my cordial, to which, like
other dram-drinkers, I had eager recourse when unsettled by chagrin.
Ere long the bell rang its _reveillee_ to the whole school. Being
dressed, I descended alone to the refectory, where the stove was lit
and the air was warm; through the rest of the house it was cold, with
the nipping severity of a continental winter: though now but the
beginning of November, a north wind had thus early brought a wintry
blight over Europe: I remember the black stoves pleased me little when
I first came; but now I began to associate with them a sense of
comfort, and liked them, as in England we like a fireside.
Sitting down before this dark comforter, I presently fell into a deep
argument with myself on life and its chances, on destiny and her
decrees. My mind, calmer and stronger now than last night, made for
itself some imperious rules, prohibiting under deadly penalties all
weak retrospect of happiness past; commanding a patient journeying
through the wilderness of the present, enjoining a reliance on faith--
a watching of the cloud and pillar which subdue while they guide, and
awe while they illumine--hushing the impulse to fond idolatry,
checking the longing out-look for a far-off promised land whose rivers
are, perhaps, never to be, reached save in dying dreams, whose sweet
pastures are to be viewed but from the desolate and sepulchral summit
of a Nebo.
By degrees, a composite feeling of blended strength and pain wound
itself wirily round my heart, sustained, or at least restrained, its
throbbings, and made me fit for the day's work. I lifted my head.
As I said before, I was sitting near the stove, let into the wall
beneath the refectory and the carre, and thus sufficing to heat both
apartments. Piercing the same wall, and close beside the stove, was a
window, looking also into the carre; as I looked up a cap-tassel, a
brow, two eyes, filled a pane of that window; the fixed gaze of those
two eyes hit right against my own glance: they were watching me. I had
not till that moment known that tears were on my cheek, but I felt
them now.
This was a strange house, where no corner was sacred from intrusion,
where not a tear could be shed, nor a thought pondered, but a spy was
at hand to note and to divine. And this new, this out-door, this male
spy, what business had brought him to the premises at this unwonted
hour? What possible right had he to intrude on me thus? No other
professor would have dared to cross the carre before the class-bell
rang. M. Emanuel took no account of hours nor of claims: there was
some book of reference in the first-class library which he had
occasion to consult; he had come to seek it: on his way he passed the
refectory. It was very much his habit to wear eyes before, behind, and
on each side of him: he had seen me through the little window--he now
opened the refectory door, and there he stood.
"Mademoiselle, vous etes triste."
"Monsieur, j'en ai bien le droit."
"Vous etes malade de coeur et d'humeur," he pursued. "You are at once
mournful and mutinous. I see on your cheek two tears which I know are
hot as two sparks, and salt as two