order a slight
mourning dress, which will be much sooner prepared than the nuptial
trousseau."
"Cruel Zoraide! you laugh at the distress of one who loves you so
devotedly as I do: my torment is your sport; you scruple not to stretch
my soul on the rack of jealousy; for, deny it as you will, I am certain
you have cast encouraging glances on that school-boy, Crimsworth; he has
presumed to fall in love, which he dared not have done unless you had
given him room to hope."
"What do you say, Francois? Do you say Crimsworth is in love with me?"
"Over head and ears."
"Has he told you so?"
"No--but I see it in his face: he blushes whenever your name is
mentioned." A little laugh of exulting coquetry announced Mdlle.
Reuter's gratification at this piece of intelligence (which was a lie,
by-the-by--I had never been so far gone as that, after all). M. Pelet
proceeded to ask what she intended to do with me, intimating pretty
plainly, and not very gallantly, that it was nonsense for her to think
of taking such a "blanc-bec" as a husband, since she must be at least
ten years older than I (was she then thirty-two? I should not have
thought it). I heard her disclaim any intentions on the subject--the
director, however, still pressed her to give a definite answer.
"Francois," said she, "you are jealous," and still she laughed; then, as
if suddenly recollecting that this coquetry was not consistent with the
character for modest dignity she wished to establish, she proceeded,
in a demure voice: "Truly, my dear Francois, I will not deny that this
young Englishman may have made some attempts to ingratiate himself with
me; but, so far from giving him any encouragement, I have always treated
him with as much reserve as it was possible to combine with civility;
affianced as I am to you, I would give no man false hopes; believe me,
dear friend." Still Pelet uttered murmurs of distrust--so I judged, at
least, from her reply.
"What folly! How could I prefer an unknown foreigner to you? And
then--not to flatter your vanity--Crimsworth could not bear comparison
with you either physically or mentally; he is not a handsome man at all;
some may call him gentleman-like and intelligent-looking, but for my
part--"
The rest of the sentence was lost in the distance, as the pair, rising
from the chair in which they had been seated, moved away. I waited their
return, but soon the opening and shutting of a door informed me that
they had re-entered the house; I listened a little longer, all was
perfectly still; I listened more than an hour--at last I heard M. Pelet
come in and ascend to his chamber. Glancing once more towards the long
front of the garden-house, I perceived that its solitary light was
at length extinguished; so, for a time, was my faith in love and
friendship. I went to bed, but something feverish and fiery had got into
my veins which prevented me from sleeping much that night.
CHAPTER XIII.
NEXT morning I rose with the dawn, and having dressed myself and stood
half-an-hour, my elbow leaning on the chest of drawers, considering what
means I should adopt to restore my spirits, fagged with sleeplessness,
to their ordinary tone--for I had no intention of getting up a scene
with M. Pelet, reproaching him with perfidy, sending him a challenge, or
performing other gambadoes of the sort--I hit at last on the
expedient of walking out in the cool of the morning to a neighbouring
establishment of baths, and treating myself to a bracing plunge.
The remedy produced the desired effect. I came back at seven o'clock
steadied and invigorated, and was able to greet M. Pelet, when he
entered to breakfast, with an unchanged and tranquil countenance; even
a cordial offering of the hand and the flattering appellation of "mon
fils," pronounced in that caressing tone with which Monsieur had, of
late days especially, been accustomed to address me, did not elicit any
external sign of the feeling which, though subdued, still glowed at
my heart. Not that I nursed vengeance--no; but the sense of insult and
treachery lived in me like a kindling, though as yet smothered coal. God
knows I am not by nature vindictive; I would not hurt a man because I
can no longer trust or like him; but neither my reason nor feelings
are of the vacillating order--they are not of that sand-like sort where
impressions, if soon made, are as soon effaced. Once convinced that my
friend's disposition is incompatible with my own, once assured that he
is indelibly stained with certain defects obnoxious to my principles,
and I dissolve the connection. I did so with Edward. As to Pelet, the
discovery was yet new; should I act thus with him? It was the question I
placed before my mind as I stirred my cup of coffee with a half-pistolet
(we never had spoons), Pelet meantime being seated opposite, his pallid
face looking as knowing and more haggard than usual, his blue eye
turned, now sternly on his boys and ushers, and now graciously on me.
"Circumstances must guide me," said I; and meeting Pelet's false glance
and insinuating smile, I thanked heaven that I had last night opened
my window and read by the light of a full moon the true meaning of that
guileful countenance. I felt half his master, because the reality of
his nature was now known to me; smile and flatter as he would, I saw his
soul lurk behind his smile, and heard in every one of his smooth phrases
a voice interpreting their treacherous import.
But Zoraide Reuter? Of course her defection had cut me to the quick?
That stint; must have gone too deep for any consolations of philosophy
to be available in curing its smart? Not at all. The night fever over,
I looked about for balm to that wound also, and found some nearer home
than at Gilead. Reason was my physician; she began by proving that the
prize I had missed was of little value: she admitted that, physically,
Zoraide might have suited me, but affirmed that our souls were not in
harmony, and that discord must have resulted from the union of her mind
with mine. She then insisted on the suppression of all repining,
and commanded me rather to rejoice that I had escaped a snare. Her
medicament did me good. I felt its strengthening effect when