a good plan; execute
it; you have my free consent, and wherever and whenever my assistance is
wanted, ask and you shall have."
Frances' eyes thanked me almost with tears; just a sparkle or two, soon
brushed away; she possessed herself of my hand too, and held it for
some time very close clasped in both her own, but she said no more than
"Thank you, monsieur."
We passed a divine day, and came home late, lighted by a full summer
moon.
Ten years rushed now upon me with dusty, vibrating, unresting wings;
years of bustle, action, unslacked endeavour; years in which I and
my wife, having launched ourselves in the full career of progress, as
progress whirls on in European capitals, scarcely knew repose, were
strangers to amusement, never thought of indulgence, and yet, as
our course ran side by side, as we marched hand in hand, we neither
murmured, repented, nor faltered. Hope indeed cheered us; health kept us
up; harmony of thought and deed smoothed many difficulties, and finally,
success bestowed every now and then encouraging reward on diligence. Our
school became one of the most popular in Brussels, and as by degrees
we raised our terms and elevated our system of education, our choice of
pupils grew more select, and at length included the children of the
best families in Belgium. We had too an excellent connection in England,
first opened by the unsolicited recommendation of Mr. Hunsden, who
having been over, and having abused me for my prosperity in set terms,
went back, and soon after sent a leash of young ----shire heiresses--his
cousins; as he said "to be polished off by Mrs. Crimsworth."
As to this same Mrs. Crimsworth, in one sense she was become another
woman, though in another she remained unchanged. So different was
she under different circumstances. I seemed to possess two wives. The
faculties of her nature, already disclosed when I married her, remained
fresh and fair; but other faculties shot up strong, branched out
broad, and quite altered the external character of the plant. Firmness,
activity, and enterprise, covered with grave foliage, poetic feeling
and fervour; but these flowers were still there, preserved pure and dewy
under the umbrage of later growth and hardier nature: perhaps I only in
the world knew the secret of their existence, but to me they were ever
ready to yield an exquisite fragrance and present a beauty as chaste as
radiant.
In the daytime my house and establishment were conducted by Madame the
directress, a stately and elegant woman, bearing much anxious thought on
her large brow; much calculated dignity in her serious mien: immediately
after breakfast I used to part with this lady; I went to my college,
she to her schoolroom; returning for an hour in the course of the day,
I found her always in class, intently occupied; silence, industry,
observance, attending on her presence. When not actually teaching,
she was overlooking and guiding by eye and gesture; she then appeared
vigilant and solicitous. When communicating instruction, her aspect was
more animated; she seemed to feel a certain enjoyment in the occupation.
The language in which she addressed her pupils, though simple and
unpretending, was never trite or dry; she did not speak from routine
formulas--she made her own phrases as she went on, and very nervous
and impressive phrases they frequently were; often, when elucidating
favourite points of history, or geography, she would wax genuinely
eloquent in her earnestness. Her pupils, or at least the elder and more
intelligent amongst them, recognized well the language of a superior
mind; they felt too, and some of them received the impression of
elevated sentiments; there was little fondling between mistress and
girls, but some of Frances' pupils in time learnt to love her sincerely,
all of them beheld her with respect; her general demeanour towards
them was serious; sometimes benignant when they pleased her with their
progress and attention, always scrupulously refined and considerate.
In cases where reproof or punishment was called for she was usually
forbearing enough; but if any took advantage of that forbearance, which
sometimes happened, a sharp, sudden and lightning-like severity taught
the culprit the extent of the mistake committed. Sometimes a gleam of
tenderness softened her eyes and manner, but this was rare; only when
a pupil was sick, or when it pined after home, or in the case of some
little motherless child, or of one much poorer than its companions,
whose scanty wardrobe and mean appointments brought on it the contempt
of the jewelled young countesses and silk-clad misses. Over such feeble
fledglings the directress spread a wing of kindliest protection: it was
to their bedside she came at night to tuck them warmly in; it was after
them she looked in winter to see that they always had a comfortable seat
by the stove; it was they who by turns were summoned to the salon to
receive some little dole of cake or fruit--to sit on a footstool at
the fireside--to enjoy home comforts, and almost home liberty, for
an evening together--to be spoken to gently and softly, comforted,
encouraged, cherished--and when bedtime came, dismissed with a kiss
of true tenderness. As to Julia and Georgiana G----, daughters of an
English baronet, as to Mdlle. Mathilde de ----, heiress of a Belgian
count, and sundry other children of patrician race, the directress was
careful of them as of the others, anxious for their progress, as for
that of the rest--but it never seemed to enter her head to distinguish
them by a mark of preference; one girl of noble blood she loved
dearly--a young Irish baroness--lady Catherine ----; but it was for her
enthusiastic heart and clever head, for her generosity and her genius,
the title and rank went for nothing.
My afternoons were spent also in college, with the exception of an hour
that my wife daily exacted of me for her establishment, and with which
she would not dispense. She said that I must spend that time amongst her
pupils to learn their characters, to be AU COURANT with everything that
was passing in the house, to become interested in what interested her,
to be able to give her my opinion on knotty points when she required it,
and this she did constantly, never allowing my interest in the pupils
to fall asleep, and never making any change of importance without
my cognizance and consent. She delighted to sit by me when I gave my
lessons (lessons in literature), her hands folded on her knee, the most
fixedly