aid I presently got her placed just where I wanted her to be,
that is, between my desk and the window, where she was screened from the
rush of the second division, and where no one could sneak behind her to
listen.
"Take a seat," I said, placing a tabouret; and I made her sit down. I
knew what I was doing would be considered a very strange thing, and,
what was more, I did not care. Frances knew it also, and, I fear, by an
appearance of agitation and trembling, that she cared much. I drew from
my pocket the rolled-up devoir.
"This it, yours, I suppose?" said I, addressing her in English, for I
now felt sure she could speak English.
"Yes," she answered distinctly; and as I unrolled it and laid it out
flat on the desk before her with my hand upon it, and a pencil in that
hand, I saw her moved, and, as it were, kindled; her depression beamed
as a cloud might behind which the sun is burning.
"This devoir has numerous faults," said I. "It will take you some years
of careful study before you are in a condition to write English with
absolute correctness. Attend: I will point out some principal defects."
And I went through it carefully, noting every error, and demonstrating
why they were errors, and how the words or phrases ought to have been
written. In the course of this sobering process she became calm. I now
went on:
"As to the substance of your devoir, Mdlle. Henri, it has surprised me;
I perused it with pleasure, because I saw in it some proofs of taste and
fancy. Taste and fancy are not the highest gifts of the human mind, but
such as they are you possess them--not probably in a paramount degree,
but in a degree beyond what the majority can boast. You may then take
courage; cultivate the faculties that God and nature have bestowed on
you, and do not fear in any crisis of suffering, under any pressure of
injustice, to derive free and full consolation from the consciousness of
their strength and rarity."
"Strength and rarity!" I repeated to myself; "ay, the words are probably
true," for on looking up, I saw the sun had dissevered its screening
cloud, her countenance was transfigured, a smile shone in her eyes--a
smile almost triumphant; it seemed to say--
"I am glad you have been forced to discover so much of my nature; you
need not so carefully moderate your language. Do you think I am myself a
stranger to myself? What you tell me in terms so qualified, I have known
fully from a child."
She did say this as plainly as a frank and flashing glance could, but
in a moment the glow of her complexion, the radiance of her aspect,
had subsided; if strongly conscious of her talents, she was equally
conscious of her harassing defects, and the remembrance of these
obliterated for a single second, now reviving with sudden force, at once
subdued the too vivid characters in which her sense of her powers had
been expressed. So quick was the revulsion of feeling, I had not time to
check her triumph by reproof; ere I could contract my brows to a frown
she had become serious and almost mournful-looking.
"Thank you, sir," said she, rising. There was gratitude both in her
voice and in the look with which she accompanied it. It was time,
indeed, for our conference to terminate; for, when I glanced around,
behold all the boarders (the day-scholars had departed) were congregated
within a yard or two of my desk, and stood staring with eyes and mouths
wide open; the three maitresses formed a whispering knot in one corner,
and, close at my elbow, was the directress, sitting on a low chair,
calmly clipping the tassels of her finished purse.
CHAPTER XVII.
AFTER all I had profited but imperfectly by the opportunity I had so
boldly achieved of speaking to Mdlle. Henri; it was my intention to ask
her how she came to be possessed of two English baptismal names, Frances
and Evans, in addition to her French surname, also whence she derived
her good accent. I had forgotten both points, or, rather, our colloquy
had been so brief that I had not had time to bring them forward;
moreover, I had not half tested her powers of speaking English; all I
had drawn from her in that language were the words "Yes," and "Thank
you, sir." "No matter," I reflected. "What has been left incomplete now,
shall be finished another day." Nor did I fail to keep the promise thus
made to myself. It was difficult to get even a few words of particular
conversation with one pupil among so many; but, according to the old
proverb, "Where there is a will, there is a way;" and again and again
I managed to find an opportunity for exchanging a few words with Mdlle.
Henri, regardless that envy stared and detraction whispered whenever I
approached her.
"Your book an instant." Such was the mode in which I often began these
brief dialogues; the time was always just at the conclusion of the
lesson; and motioning to her to rise, I installed myself in her place,
allowing her to stand deferentially at my side; for I esteemed it wise
and right in her case to enforce strictly all forms ordinarily in
use between master and pupil; the rather because I perceived that in
proportion as my manner grew austere and magisterial, hers became easy
and self-possessed--an odd contradiction, doubtless, to the ordinary
effect in such cases; but so it was.
"A pencil," said I, holding out my hand without looking at her. (I am
now about to sketch a brief report of the first of these conferences.)
She gave me one, and while I underlined some errors in a grammatical
exercise she had written, I observed--
"You are not a native of Belgium?"
"No."
"Nor of France?"
"No."
"Where, then, is your birthplace?"
"I was born at Geneva."
"You don't call Frances and Evans Swiss names, I presume?"
"No, sir; they are English names."
"Just so; and is it the custom of the Genevese to give their children
English appellatives?"
"Non, Monsieur; mais--"
"Speak English, if you please."
"Mais--"
"English--"
"But" (slowly and with embarrassment) "my parents were not all the two
Genevese."
"Say BOTH, instead of 'all the two,' mademoiselle."
"Not BOTH Swiss: my mother was English."
"Ah! and of English extraction?"
"Yes--her ancestors were all English."
"And your father?"
"He was Swiss."
"What besides? What was