from it is--that, being a steady, reasonable
man, I did not allow the resentment, disappointment, and grief,
engendered in my mind by this evil chance, to grow there to any
monstrous size; nor did I allow them to monopolize the whole space of my
heart; I pent them, on the contrary, in one strait and secret nook. In
the daytime, too, when I was about my duties, I put them on the silent
system; and it was only after I had closed the door of my chamber
at night that I somewhat relaxed my severity towards these morose
nurslings, and allowed vent to their language of murmurs; then, in
revenge, they sat on my pillow, haunted my bed, and kept me awake with
their long, midnight cry.
A week passed. I had said nothing more to Mdlle. Reuter. I had been calm
in my demeanour to her, though stony cold and hard. When I looked at
her, it was with the glance fitting to be bestowed on one who I knew
had consulted jealousy as an adviser, and employed treachery as an
instrument--the glance of quiet disdain and rooted distrust. On Saturday
evening, ere I left the house, I stept into the SALLE-A-MANGER, where
she was sitting alone, and, placing myself before her, I asked, with
the same tranquil tone and manner that I should have used had I put the
question for the first time--
"Mademoiselle, will you have the goodness to give me the address of
Frances Evans Henri?"
A little surprised, but not disconcerted, she smilingly disclaimed any
knowledge of that address, adding, "Monsieur has perhaps forgotten that
I explained all about that circumstance before--a week ago?"
"Mademoiselle," I continued, "you would greatly oblige me by directing
me to that young person's abode."
She seemed somewhat puzzled; and, at last, looking up with an admirably
counterfeited air of naivete, she demanded, "Does Monsieur think I am
telling an untruth?"
Still avoiding to give her a direct answer, I said, "It is not then your
intention, mademoiselle, to oblige me in this particular?"
"But, monsieur, how can I tell you what I do not know?"
"Very well; I understand you perfectly, mademoiselle, and now I have
only two or three words to say. This is the last week in July; in
another month the vacation will commence, have the goodness to avail
yourself of the leisure it will afford you to look out for another
English master--at the close of August, I shall be under the necessity
of resigning my post in your establishment."
I did not wait for her comments on this announcement, but bowed and
immediately withdrew.
That same evening, soon after dinner, a servant brought me a small
packet; it was directed in a hand I knew, but had not hoped so soon to
see again; being in my own apartment and alone, there was nothing to
prevent my immediately opening it; it contained four five-franc pieces,
and a note in English.
"MONSIEUR,
"I came to Mdlle. Reuter's house yesterday, at the time when
I knew you would be just about finishing your lesson, and I asked if I
might go into the schoolroom and speak to you. Mdlle. Reuter came out
and said you were already gone; it had not yet struck four, so I thought
she must be mistaken, but concluded it would be vain to call another day
on the same errand. In one sense a note will do as well--it will wrap up
the 20 francs, the price of the lessons I have received from you; and if
it will not fully express the thanks I owe you in addition--if it will
not bid you good-bye as I could wish to have done--if it will not tell
you, as I long to do, how sorry I am that I shall probably never see you
more--why, spoken words would hardly be more adequate to the task. Had
I seen you, I should probably have stammered out something feeble and
unsatisfactory--something belying my feelings rather than explaining
them; so it is perhaps as well that I was denied admission to your
presence. You often remarked, monsieur, that my devoirs dwelt a great
deal on fortitude in bearing grief--you said I introduced that theme too
often: I find indeed that it is much easier to write about a severe duty
than to perform it, for I am oppressed when I see and feel to what a
reverse fate has condemned me; you were kind to me, monsieur--very kind;
I am afflicted--I am heart-broken to be quite separated from you; soon
I shall have no friend on earth. But it is useless troubling you with my
distresses. What claim have I on your sympathy? None; I will then say no
more.
"Farewell, Monsieur.
"F. E. HENRI."
I put up the note in my pocket-book. I slipped the five-franc pieces
into my purse--then I took a turn through my narrow chamber.
"Mdlle. Reuter talked about her poverty," said I, "and she is poor;
yet she pays her debts and more. I have not yet given her a quarter's
lessons, and she has sent me a quarter's due. I wonder of what she
deprived herself to scrape together the twenty francs--I wonder what
sort of a place she has to live in, and what sort of a woman her aunt
is, and whether she is likely to get employment to supply the place she
has lost. No doubt she will have to trudge about long enough from school
to school, to inquire here, and apply there--be rejected in this place,
disappointed in that. Many an evening she'll go to her bed tired
and unsuccessful. And the directress would not let her in to bid me
good-bye? I might not have the chance of standing with her for a few
minutes at a window in the schoolroom and exchanging some half-dozen of
sentences--getting to know where she lived--putting matters in train
for having all things arranged to my mind? No address on the note"--I
continued, drawing it again from the pocket-book and examining it on
each side of the two leaves: "women are women, that is certain, and
always do business like women; men mechanically put a date and address
to their communications. And these five-franc pieces?"--(I hauled them
forth from my purse)--"if she had offered me them herself instead of
tying them up with a thread of green silk in a kind of Lilliputian
packet, I could have thrust them back into her little hand, and shut
up the small, taper fingers