of the cabmen and others
waiting round, seemed to me odd as a foreign tongue. I had never
before heard the English language chopped up in that way. However, I
managed to understand and to be understood, so far as to get myself
and trunk safely conveyed to the old inn whereof I had the address.
How difficult, how oppressive, how puzzling seemed my flight! In
London for the first time; at an inn for the first time; tired with
travelling; confused with darkness; palsied with cold; unfurnished
with either experience or advice to tell me how to act, and yet--to
act obliged.
Into the hands of common sense I confided the matter. Common sense,
however, was as chilled and bewildered as all my other faculties, and
it was only under the spur of an inexorable necessity that she
spasmodically executed her trust. Thus urged, she paid the porter:
considering the crisis, I did not blame her too much that she was
hugely cheated; she asked the waiter for a room; she timorously called
for the chambermaid; what is far more, she bore, without being wholly
overcome, a highly supercilious style of demeanour from that young
lady, when she appeared.
I recollect this same chambermaid was a pattern of town prettiness and
smartness. So trim her waist, her cap, her dress--I wondered how they
had all been manufactured. Her speech had an accent which in its
mincing glibness seemed to rebuke mine as by authority; her spruce
attire flaunted an easy scorn to my plain country garb.
"Well, it can't be helped," I thought, "and then the scene is new, and
the circumstances; I shall gain good."
Maintaining a very quiet manner towards this arrogant little maid, and
subsequently observing the same towards the parsonic-looking, black-
coated, white-neckclothed waiter, I got civility from them ere long. I
believe at first they thought I was a servant; but in a little while
they changed their minds, and hovered in a doubtful state between
patronage and politeness.
I kept up well till I had partaken of some refreshment, warmed myself
by a fire, and was fairly shut into my own room; but, as I sat down by
the bed and rested my head and arms on the pillow, a terrible
oppression overcame me. All at once my position rose on me like a
ghost. Anomalous, desolate, almost blank of hope it stood. What was I
doing here alone in great London? What should I do on the morrow? What
prospects had I in life? What friends had I on, earth? Whence did I
come? Whither should I go? What should I do?
I wet the pillow, my arms, and my hair, with rushing tears. A dark
interval of most bitter thought followed this burst; but I did not
regret the step taken, nor wish to retract it A strong, vague
persuasion that it was better to go forward than backward, and that I
_could_ go forward--that a way, however narrow and difficult,
would in time open--predominated over other feelings: its influence
hushed them so far, that at last I became sufficiently tranquil to be
able to say my prayers and seek my couch. I had just extinguished my
candle and lain down, when a deep, low, mighty tone swung through the
night. At first I knew it not; but it was uttered twelve times, and at
the twelfth colossal hum and trembling knell, I said: "I lie in the
shadow of St. Paul's."
CHAPTER VI.
LONDON.
The next day was the first of March, and when I awoke, rose, and
opened my curtain, I saw the risen sun struggling through fog. Above
my head, above the house-tops, co-elevate almost with the clouds, I
saw a solemn, orbed mass, dark blue and dim--THE DOME. While I looked,
my inner self moved; my spirit shook its always-fettered wings half
loose; I had a sudden feeling as if I, who never yet truly lived, were
at last about to taste life. In that morning my soul grew as fast as
Jonah's gourd.
"I did well to come," I said, proceeding to dress with speed and care.
"I like the spirit of this great London which I feel around me. Who
but a coward would pass his whole life in hamlets; and for ever
abandon his faculties to the eating rust of obscurity?"
Being dressed, I went down; not travel-worn and exhausted, but tidy
and refreshed. When the waiter came in with my breakfast, I managed to
accost him sedately, yet cheerfully; we had ten minutes' discourse, in
the course of which we became usefully known to each other.
He was a grey-haired, elderly man; and, it seemed, had lived in his
present place twenty years. Having ascertained this, I was sure he
must remember my two uncles, Charles and Wilmot, who, fifteen, years
ago, were frequent visitors here. I mentioned their names; he recalled
them perfectly, and with respect. Having intimated my connection, my
position in his eyes was henceforth clear, and on a right footing. He
said I was like my uncle Charles: I suppose he spoke truth, because
Mrs. Barrett was accustomed to say the same thing. A ready and
obliging courtesy now replaced his former uncomfortably doubtful
manner; henceforth I need no longer be at a loss for a civil answer to
a sensible question.
The street on which my little sitting-room window looked was narrow,
perfectly quiet, and not dirty: the few passengers were just such as
one sees in provincial towns: here was nothing formidable; I felt sure
I might venture out alone.
Having breakfasted, out I went. Elation and pleasure were in my heart:
to walk alone in London seemed of itself an adventure. Presently I
found myself in Paternoster Row--classic ground this. I entered a
bookseller's shop, kept by one Jones: I bought a little book--a piece
of extravagance I could ill afford; but I thought I would one day give
or send it to Mrs. Barrett. Mr. Jones, a dried-in man of business,
stood behind his desk: he seemed one of the greatest, and I one of the
happiest of beings.
Prodigious was the amount of life I lived that morning. Finding myself
before St. Paul's, I went in; I mounted to the dome: I saw thence
London, with its river, and its bridges, and its churches; I saw
antique Westminster, and the green Temple Gardens, with sun upon them,
and a glad, blue sky, of early spring above; and between them and it,
not too dense, a cloud of haze.
Descending, I went wandering whither