I never saw such eyes and
brows in England. Madame Beck introduced me in one cool phrase, sailed
from the room, and left me alone in my glory.
I shall never forget that first lesson, nor all the under-current of
life and character it opened up to me. Then first did I begin rightly
to see the wide difference that lies between the novelist's and poet's
ideal "jeune fille" and the said "jeune fille" as she really is.
It seems that three titled belles in the first row had sat down
predetermined that a _bonne d'enfants_ should not give them
lessons in English. They knew they had succeeded in expelling
obnoxious teachers before now; they knew that Madame would at any time
throw overboard a professeur or maitresse who became unpopular with
the school--that she never assisted a weak official to retain his
place--that if he had not strength to fight, or tact to win his way,
down he went: looking at "Miss Snowe," they promised themselves an
easy victory.
Mesdemoiselles Blanche, Virginie, and Angelique opened the campaign by
a series of titterings and whisperings; these soon swelled into
murmurs and short laughs, which the remoter benches caught up and
echoed more loudly. This growing revolt of sixty against one, soon
became oppressive enough; my command of French being so limited, and
exercised under such cruel constraint.
Could I but have spoken in my own tongue, I felt as if I might have
gained a hearing; for, in the first place, though I knew I looked a
poor creature, and in many respects actually was so, yet nature had
given me a voice that could make itself heard, if lifted in excitement
or deepened by emotion. In the second place, while I had no flow, only
a hesitating trickle of language, in ordinary circumstances, yet--
under stimulus such as was now rife through the mutinous mass--I
could, in English, have rolled out readily phrases stigmatizing their
proceedings as such proceedings deserved to be stigmatized; and then
with some sarcasm, flavoured with contemptuous bitterness for the
ringleaders, and relieved with easy banter for the weaker but less
knavish followers, it seemed to me that one might possibly get command
over this wild herd, and bring them into training, at least. All I
could now do was to walk up to Blanche--Mademoiselle de Melcy, a young
baronne--the eldest, tallest, handsomest, and most vicious--stand
before her desk, take from under her hand her exercise-book, remount
the estrade, deliberately read the composition, which I found very
stupid, and, as deliberately, and in the face of the whole school,
tear the blotted page in two.
This action availed to draw attention and check noise. One girl alone,
quite in the background, persevered in the riot with undiminished
energy. I looked at her attentively. She had a pale face, hair like
night, broad strong eyebrows, decided features, and a dark, mutinous,
sinister eye: I noted that she sat close by a little door, which door,
I was well aware, opened into a small closet where books were kept.
She was standing up for the purpose of conducting her clamour with
freer energies. I measured her stature and calculated her strength She
seemed both tall and wiry; but, so the conflict were brief and the
attack unexpected, I thought I might manage her.
Advancing up the room, looking as cool and careless as I possibly
could, in short, _ayant l'air de rien_, I slightly pushed the
door and found it was ajar. In an instant, and with sharpness, I had
turned on her. In another instant she occupied the closet, the door
was shut, and the key in my pocket.
It so happened that this girl, Dolores by name, and a Catalonian by
race, was the sort of character at once dreaded and hated by all her
associates; the act of summary justice above noted proved popular:
there was not one present but, in her heart, liked to see it done.
They were stilled for a moment; then a smile--not a laugh--passed from
desk to desk: then--when I had gravely and tranquilly returned to the
estrade, courteously requested silence, and commenced a dictation as
if nothing at all had happened--the pens travelled peacefully over the
pages, and the remainder of the lesson passed in order and industry.
"C'est bien," said Madame Beck, when I came out of class, hot and a
little exhausted. "Ca ira."
She had been listening and peeping through a spy-hole the whole time.
From that day I ceased to be nursery governess, and became English
teacher. Madame raised my salary; but she got thrice the work out of
me she had extracted from Mr. Wilson, at half the expense.
CHAPTER IX.
ISIDORE.
My time was now well and profitably filled up. What with teaching
others and studying closely myself, I had hardly a spare moment. It
was pleasant. I felt I was getting, on; not lying the stagnant prey of
mould and rust, but polishing my faculties and whetting them to a keen
edge with constant use. Experience of a certain kind lay before me, on
no narrow scale. Villette is a cosmopolitan city, and in this school
were girls of almost every European nation, and likewise of very
varied rank in life. Equality is much practised in Labassecour; though
not republican in form, it is nearly so in substance, and at the desks
of Madame Beck's establishment the young countess and the young
bourgeoise sat side by side. Nor could you always by outward
indications decide which was noble and which plebeian; except that,
indeed, the latter had often franker and more courteous manners, while
the former bore away the bell for a delicately-balanced combination of
insolence and deceit. In the former there was often quick French blood
mixed with the marsh-phlegm: I regret to say that the effect of this
vivacious fluid chiefly appeared in the oilier glibness with which
flattery and fiction ran from the tongue, and in a manner lighter and
livelier, but quite heartless and insincere.
To do all parties justice, the honest aboriginal Labassecouriennes had
an hypocrisy of their own, too; but it was of a coarse order, such as
could deceive few. Whenever a lie was necessary for their occasions,
they brought it out with a careless ease and breadth altogether
untroubled by the rebuke of conscience. Not a soul in Madame Beck's
house, from the scullion to the directress herself, but was above
being ashamed of a lie; they thought nothing of it: to invent might
not be precisely a virtue, but it was