just now
at least, pleasure played with thought--this expectation not being
gratified, I began at last to suspect that I had probably myself to
blame for the disappointment; I must cease gazing, and begin talking,
if I wished to break the spell under which she now sat motionless; so
recollecting the composing effect which an authoritative tone and manner
had ever been wont to produce on her, I said--
"Get one of your English books, mademoiselle, for the rain yet falls
heavily, and will probably detain me half an hour longer."
Released, and set at ease, up she rose, got her book, and accepted at
once the chair I placed for her at my side. She had selected "Paradise
Lost" from her shelf of classics, thinking, I suppose, the religious
character of the book best adapted it to Sunday; I told her to begin at
the beginning, and while she read Milton's invocation to that heavenly
muse, who on the "secret top of Oreb or Sinai" had taught the Hebrew
shepherd how in the womb of chaos, the conception of a world had
originated and ripened, I enjoyed, undisturbed, the treble pleasure of
having her near me, hearing the sound of her voice--a sound sweet and
satisfying in my ear--and looking, by intervals, at her face: of this
last privilege, I chiefly availed myself when I found fault with an
intonation, a pause, or an emphasis; as long as I dogmatized, I might
also gaze, without exciting too warm a flush.
"Enough," said I, when she had gone through some half dozen pages (a
work of time with her, for she read slowly and paused often to ask and
receive information)--"enough; and now the rain is ceasing, and I must
soon go." For indeed, at that moment, looking towards the window, I
saw it all blue; the thunder-clouds were broken and scattered, and the
setting August sun sent a gleam like the reflection of rubies through
the lattice. I got up; I drew on my gloves.
"You have not yet found another situation to supply the place of that
from which you were dismissed by Mdlle. Reuter?"
"No, monsieur; I have made inquiries everywhere, but they all ask me
for references; and to speak truth, I do not like to apply to the
directress, because I consider she acted neither justly nor honourably
towards me; she used underhand means to set my pupils against me, and
thereby render me unhappy while I held my place in her establishment,
and she eventually deprived me of it by a masked and hypocritical
manoeuvre, pretending that she was acting for my good, but really
snatching from me my chief means of subsistence, at a crisis when not
only my own life, but that of another, depended on my exertions: of her
I will never more ask a favour."
"How, then, do you propose to get on? How do you live now?"
"I have still my lace-mending trade; with care it will keep me from
starvation, and I doubt not by dint of exertion to get better employment
yet; it is only a fortnight since I began to try; my courage or hopes
are by no means worn out yet."
"And if you get what you wish, what then? what are your ultimate views?"
"To save enough to cross the Channel: I always look to England as my
Canaan."
"Well, well--ere long I shall pay you another visit; good evening now,"
and I left her rather abruptly; I had much ado to resist a strong inward
impulse, urging me to take a warmer, more expressive leave: what so
natural as to fold her for a moment in a close embrace, to imprint one
kiss on her cheek or forehead? I was not unreasonable--that was all I
wanted; satisfied in that point, I could go away content; and Reason
denied me even this; she ordered me to turn my eyes from her face, and
my steps from her apartment--to quit her as dryly and coldly as I would
have quitted old Madame Pelet. I obeyed, but I swore rancorously to be
avenged one day. "I'll earn a right to do as I please in this matter,
or I'll die in the contest. I have one object before me now--to get that
Genevese girl for my wife; and my wife she shall be--that is, provided
she has as much, or half as much regard for her master as he has
for her. And would she be so docile, so smiling, so happy under my
instructions if she had not? would she sit at my side when I dictate
or correct, with such a still, contented, halcyon mien?" for I had ever
remarked, that however sad or harassed her countenance might be when
I entered a room, yet after I had been near her, spoken to her a few
words, given her some directions, uttered perhaps some reproofs, she
would, all at once, nestle into a nook of happiness, and look up serene
and revived. The reproofs suited her best of all: while I scolded she
would chip away with her pen-knife at a pencil or a pen; fidgetting a
little, pouting a little, defending herself by monosyllables, and when I
deprived her of the pen or pencil, fearing it would be all cut away,
and when I interdicted even the monosyllabic defence, for the purpose
of working up the subdued excitement a little higher, she would at last
raise her eyes and give me a certain glance, sweetened with gaiety, and
pointed with defiance, which, to speak truth, thrilled me as nothing had
ever done, and made me, in a fashion (though happily she did not know
it), her subject, if not her slave. After such little scenes her spirits
would maintain their flow, often for some hours, and, as I remarked
before, her health therefrom took a sustenance and vigour which,
previously to the event of her aunt's death and her dismissal, had
almost recreated her whole frame.
It has taken me several minutes to write these last sentences; but I had
thought all their purport during the brief interval of descending the
stairs from Frances' room. Just as I was opening the outer door,
I remembered the twenty francs which I had not restored; I paused:
impossible to carry them away with me; difficult to force them back
on their original owner; I had now seen her in her own humble abode,
witnessed the dignity of her poverty, the pride of order, the