that I should like, of course,
to retain my employment of teaching. You will teach still, I suppose,
monsieur?"
"Oh, yes! It is all I have to depend on."
"Bon!--I mean good. Thus we shall have both the same profession. I like
that; and my efforts to get on will be as unrestrained as yours--will
they not, monsieur?"
"You are laying plans to be independent of me," said I.
"Yes, monsieur; I must be no incumbrance to you--no burden in any way."
"But, Frances, I have not yet told you what my prospects are. I have
left M. Pelet's; and after nearly a month's seeking, I have got another
place, with a salary of three thousand francs a year, which I can easily
double by a little additional exertion. Thus you see it would be useless
for you to fag yourself by going out to give lessons; on six thousand
francs you and I can live, and live well."
Frances seemed to consider. There is something flattering to man's
strength, something consonant to his honourable pride, in the idea of
becoming the providence of what he loves--feeding and clothing it, as
God does the lilies of the field. So, to decide her resolution, I went
on:--
"Life has been painful and laborious enough to you so far, Frances; you
require complete rest; your twelve hundred francs would not form a very
important addition to our income, and what sacrifice of comfort to earn
it! Relinquish your labours: you must be weary, and let me have the
happiness of giving you rest."
I am not sure whether Frances had accorded due attention to my harangue;
instead of answering me with her usual respectful promptitude, she only
sighed and said,--
"How rich you are, monsieur!" and then she stirred uneasy in my
arms. "Three thousand francs!" she murmured, "While I get only twelve
hundred!" She went on faster. "However, it must be so for the present;
and, monsieur, were you not saying something about my giving up my
place? Oh no! I shall hold it fast;" and her little fingers emphatically
tightened on mine.
"Think of my marrying you to be kept by you, monsieur! I could not do
it; and how dull my days would be! You would be away teaching in close,
noisy school-rooms, from morning till evening, and I should be lingering
at home, unemployed and solitary; I should get depressed and sullen, and
you would soon tire of me."
"Frances, you could read and study--two things you like so well."
"Monsieur, I could not; I like a contemplative life, but I like an
active life better; I must act in some way, and act with you. I have
taken notice, monsieur, that people who are only in each other's company
for amusement, never really like each other so well, or esteem each
other so highly, as those who work together, and perhaps suffer
together."
"You speak God's truth," said I at last, "and you shall have your own
way, for it is the best way. Now, as a reward for such ready consent,
give me a voluntary kiss."
After some hesitation, natural to a novice in the art of kissing, she
brought her lips into very shy and gentle contact with my forehead; I
took the small gift as a loan, and repaid it promptly, and with generous
interest.
I know not whether Frances was really much altered since the time
I first saw her; but, as I looked at her now, I felt that she was
singularly changed for me; the sad eye, the pale cheek, the dejected
and joyless countenance I remembered as her early attributes, were quite
gone, and now I saw a face dressed in graces; smile, dimple, and
rosy tint, rounded its contours and brightened its hues. I had been
accustomed to nurse a flattering idea that my strong attachment to her
proved some particular perspicacity in my nature; she was not handsome,
she was not rich, she was not even accomplished, yet was she my life's
treasure; I must then be a man of peculiar discernment. To-night my eyes
opened on the mistake I had made; I began to suspect that it was only my
tastes which were unique, not my power of discovering and appreciating
the superiority of moral worth over physical charms. For me Frances
had physical charms: in her there was no deformity to get over; none of
those prominent defects of eyes, teeth, complexion, shape, which hold at
bay the admiration of the boldest male champions of intellect (for
women can love a downright ugly man if he be but talented); had she been
either "edentee, myope, rugueuse, ou bossue," my feelings towards
her might still have been kindly, but they could never have been
impassioned; I had affection for the poor little misshapen Sylvie, but
for her I could never have had love. It is true Frances' mental points
had been the first to interest me, and they still retained the strongest
hold on my preference; but I liked the graces of her person too. I
derived a pleasure, purely material, from contemplating the clearness
of her brown eyes, the fairness of her fine skin, the purity of her
well-set teeth, the proportion of her delicate form; and that pleasure
I could ill have dispensed with. It appeared, then, that I too was a
sensualist, in my temperate and fastidious way.
Now, reader, during the last two pages I have been giving you honey
fresh from flowers, but you must not live entirely on food so luscious;
taste then a little gall--just a drop, by way of change.
At a somewhat late hour I returned to my lodgings: having temporarily
forgotten that man had any such coarse cares as those of eating and
drinking, I went to bed fasting. I had been excited and in action all
day, and had tasted no food since eight that morning; besides, for a
fortnight past, I had known no rest either of body or mind; the last few
hours had been a sweet delirium, it would not subside now, and till long
after midnight, broke with troubled ecstacy the rest I so much needed.
At last I dozed, but not for long; it was yet quite dark when I awoke,
and my waking was like that of Job when a spirit passed before his face,
and like him, "the hair of my flesh stood up." I might continue the
parallel, for in truth, though I saw nothing, yet "a thing was secretly
brought unto me,