to this side or to that,
Miss Fanshawe was still his neighbour. The course of acquaintance
between Ginevra and him had never run so smooth that his temper did
not undergo a certain crisping process whenever he heard her English
accent: nothing in their dispositions fitted; they jarred if they came
in contact; he held her empty and affected; she deemed him bearish,
meddling, repellent.
At last, when he had changed his place for about the sixth time,
finding still the same untoward result to the experiment--he thrust
his head forward, settled his eyes on mine, and demanded with
impatience, "Qu'est-ce que c'est? Vous me jouez des tours?"
The words were hardly out of his mouth, however, ere, with his
customary quickness, he seized the root of this proceeding: in vain I
shook out the long fringe, and spread forth the broad end of my scarf.
"A-h-h! c'est la robe rose!" broke from his lips, affecting me very
much like the sudden and irate low of some lord of the meadow.
"It is only cotton," I alleged, hurriedly; "and cheaper, and washes
better than any other colour."
"Et Mademoiselle Lucy est coquette comme dix Parisiennes," he
answered. "A-t-on jamais vu une Anglaise pareille. Regardez plutot son
chapeau, et ses gants, et ses brodequins!" These articles of dress
were just like what my companions wore; certainly not one whit
smarter--perhaps rather plainer than most--but Monsieur had now got
hold of his text, and I began to chafe under the expected sermon. It
went off, however, as mildly as the menace of a storm sometimes passes
on a summer day. I got but one flash of sheet lightning in the shape
of a single bantering smile from his eyes; and then he said,
"Courage!--a vrai dire je ne suis pas fache, peut-etre meme suis je
content qu'on s'est fait si belle pour ma petite fete."
"Mais ma robe n'est pas belle, Monsieur--elle n'est que propre."
"J'aime la proprete," said he. In short, he was not to be
dissatisfied; the sun of good humour was to triumph on this auspicious
morning; it consumed scudding clouds ere they sullied its disk.
And now we were in the country, amongst what they called "les bois et
les petits sentiers." These woods and lanes a month later would offer
but a dusty and doubtful seclusion: now, however, in their May
greenness and morning repose, they looked very pleasant.
We reached a certain well, planted round, in the taste of Labassecour,
with an orderly circle of lime-trees: here a halt was called; on the
green swell of ground surrounding this well, we were ordered to be
seated, Monsieur taking his place in our midst, and suffering us to
gather in a knot round him. Those who liked him more than they feared,
came close, and these were chiefly little ones; those who feared more
than they liked, kept somewhat aloof; those in whom much affection had
given, even to what remained of fear, a pleasurable zest, observed the
greatest distance.
He began to tell us a story. Well could he narrate: in such a diction
as children love, and learned men emulate; a diction simple in its
strength, and strong in its simplicity. There were beautiful touches
in that little tale; sweet glimpses of feeling and hues of description
that, while I listened, sunk into my mind, and since have never faded.
He tinted a twilight scene--I hold it in memory still--such a picture
I have never looked on from artist's pencil.
I have said, that, for myself, I had no impromptu faculty; and perhaps
that very deficiency made me marvel the more at one who possessed it
in perfection. M. Emanuel was not a man to write books; but I have
heard him lavish, with careless, unconscious prodigality, such mental
wealth as books seldom boast; his mind was indeed my library, and
whenever it was opened to me, I entered bliss. Intellectually
imperfect as I was, I could read little; there were few bound and
printed volumes that did not weary me--whose perusal did not fag and
blind--but his tomes of thought were collyrium to the spirit's eyes;
over their contents, inward sight grew clear and strong. I used to
think what a delight it would be for one who loved him better than he
loved himself, to gather and store up those handfuls of gold-dust, so
recklessly flung to heaven's reckless winds.
His story done, he approached the little knoll where I and Ginevra sat
apart. In his usual mode of demanding an opinion (he had not reticence
to wait till it was voluntarily offered) he asked, "Were you
interested?"
According to my wonted undemonstrative fashion, I simply answered--
"Yes."
"Was it good?"
"Very good."
"Yet I could not write that down," said he.
"Why not, Monsieur?"
"I hate the mechanical labour; I hate to stoop and sit still. I could
dictate it, though, with pleasure, to an amanuensis who suited me.
Would Mademoiselle Lucy write for me if I asked her?"
"Monsieur would be too quick; he would urge me, and be angry if my
pen did not keep pace with his lips."
"Try some day; let us see the monster I can make of myself under the
circumstances. But just now, there is no question of dictation; I mean
to make you useful in another office. Do you see yonder farm-house?"
"Surrounded with trees? Yes.".
"There we are to breakfast; and while the good fermiere makes the cafe
au lait in a caldron, you and five others, whom I shall select, will
spread with butter half a hundred rolls."
Having formed his troop into line once more, he marched us straight on
the farm, which, on seeing our force, surrendered without
capitulation.
Clean knives and plates, and fresh butter being provided, half-a-dozen
of us, chosen by our Professor, set to work under his directions, to
prepare for breakfast a huge basket of rolls, with which the baker had
been ordered to provision the farm, in anticipation of our coming.
Coffee and chocolate were already made hot; cream and new-laid eggs
were added to the treat, and M. Emanuel, always generous, would have
given a large order for "jambon" and "confitures" in addition, but
that some of us, who presumed perhaps upon our influence, insisted
that it would be a most reckless waste of victual. He railed at us for
our pains, terming us "des menageres avares;" but we let him talk, and
managed the economy of the repast our own way.
With what a pleasant countenance he stood on the farm-kitchen hearth
looking on! He was