have it so.
In the course of the afternoon, remembering that desks in classe were
by no means inviolate repositories, and thinking that it was as well
to secure the box, on account of the initials in the lid, P. C. D. E.,
for Paul Carl (or Carlos) David Emanuel--such was his full name--these
foreigners must always have a string of baptismals--I descended to the
schoolroom.
It slept in holiday repose. The day pupils were all gone home, the
boarders were out walking, the teachers, except the surveillante of
the week, were in town, visiting or shopping; the suite of divisions
was vacant; so was the grande salle, with its huge solemn globe
hanging in the midst, its pair of many-branched chandeliers, and its
horizontal grand piano closed, silent, enjoying its mid-week Sabbath.
I rather wondered to find the first classe door ajar; this room being
usually locked when empty, and being then inaccessible to any save
Madame Beck and myself, who possessed a duplicate key. I wondered
still more, on approaching, to hear a vague movement as of life--a
step, a chair stirred, a sound like the opening of a desk.
"It is only Madame Beck doing inspection duty," was the conclusion
following a moment's reflection. The partially-opened door gave
opportunity for assurance on this point. I looked. Behold! not the
inspecting garb of Madame Beck--the shawl and the clean cap--but the
coat, and the close-shorn, dark head of a man. This person occupied my
chair; his olive hand held my desk open, his nose was lost to view
amongst my papers. His back was towards me, but there could not be a
moment's question about identity. Already was the attire of ceremony
discarded: the cherished and ink-stained paletot was resumed; the
perverse bonnet-grec lay on the floor, as if just dropped from the
hand, culpably busy.
Now I knew, and I had long known, that that hand of M. Emanuel's was
on the most intimate terms with my desk; that it raised and lowered
the lid, ransacked and arranged the contents, almost as familiarly as
my own. The fact was not dubious, nor did he wish it to be so: he left
signs of each visit palpable and unmistakable; hitherto, however, I
had never caught him in the act: watch as I would, I could not detect
the hours and moments of his coming. I saw the brownie's work in
exercises left overnight full of faults, and found next morning
carefully corrected: I profited by his capricious good-will in loans
full welcome and refreshing. Between a sallow dictionary and worn-out
grammar would magically grow a fresh interesting new work, or a
classic, mellow and sweet in its ripe age. Out of my work-basket would
laughingly peep a romance, under it would lurk the pamphlet, the
magazine, whence last evening's reading had been extracted. Impossible
to doubt the source whence these treasures flowed: had there been no
other indication, one condemning and traitor peculiarity, common to
them all, settled the question--_they smelt of cigars_. This was
very shocking, of course: _I_ thought so at first, and used to
open the window with some bustle, to air my desk, and with fastidious
finger and thumb, to hold the peccant brochures forth to the purifying
breeze. I was cured of that formality suddenly. Monsieur caught me at
it one day, understood the inference, instantly relieved my hand of
its burden, and, in another moment, would have thrust the same into
the glowing stove. It chanced to be a book, on the perusal of which I
was bent; so for once I proved as decided and quicker than himself;
recaptured the spoil, and--having saved this volume--never hazarded a
second. With all this, I had never yet been able to arrest in his
visits the freakish, friendly, cigar-loving phantom.
But now at last I had him: there he was--the very brownie himself; and
there, curling from his lips, was the pale blue breath of his Indian
darling: he was smoking into my desk: it might well betray him.
Provoked at this particular, and yet pleased to surprise him--pleased,
that is, with the mixed feeling of the housewife who discovers at last
her strange elfin ally busy in the dairy at the untimely churn--I
softly stole forward, stood behind him, bent with precaution over his
shoulder.
My heart smote me to see that--after this morning's hostility, after
my seeming remissness, after the puncture experienced by his feelings,
and the ruffling undergone by his temper--he, all willing to forget
and forgive, had brought me a couple of handsome volumes, of which the
title and authorship were guarantees for interest. Now, as he sat
bending above the desk, he was stirring up its contents; but with
gentle and careful hand; disarranging indeed, but not harming. My
heart smote me: as I bent over him, as he sat unconscious, doing me
what good he could, and I daresay not feeling towards me unkindly, my
morning's anger quite melted: I did not dislike Professor Emanuel.
I think he heard me breathe. He turned suddenly: his temperament was
nervous, yet he never started, and seldom changed colour: there was
something hardy about him.
"I thought you were gone into town with the other teachers," said he,
taking a grim gripe of his self-possession, which half-escaped him--
"It is as well you are not. Do you think I care for being caught? Not
I. I often visit your desk."
"Monsieur, I know it."
"You find a brochure or tome now and then; but you don't read them,
because they have passed under this?"--touching his cigar.
"They have, and are no better for the process; but I read them."
"Without pleasure?"
"Monsieur must not be contradicted."
"Do you like them, or any of them?--are they acceptable?" "Monsieur
has seen me reading them a hundred times, and knows I have not so many
recreations as to undervalue those he provides."
"I mean well; and, if you see that I mean well, and derive some little
amusement from my efforts, why can we not be friends?"
"A fatalist would say--because we cannot."
"This morning," he continued, "I awoke in a bright mood, and came into
classe happy; you spoiled my day."
"No, Monsieur, only an hour or two of it, and that unintentionally."
"Unintentionally! No. It was my fete-day; everybody wished me
happiness but you. The little children of the third division gave each
her knot of violets, lisped each her congratulation:--you--nothing.
Not a bud, leaf, whisper--not a glance. Was this unintentional?"
"I meant no harm."
"Then you really did not know our custom? You