her interest to be trustworthy: interest
was the master-key of Madame's nature--the mainspring of her motives--
the alpha and omega of her life. I have seen her _feelings_
appealed to, and I have smiled in half-pity, half-scorn at the
appellants. None ever gained her ear through that channel, or swayed
her purpose by that means. On the contrary, to attempt to touch her
heart was the surest way to rouse her antipathy, and to make of her a
secret foe. It proved to her that she had no heart to be touched: it
reminded her where she was impotent and dead. Never was the
distinction between charity and mercy better exemplified than in her.
While devoid of sympathy, she had a sufficiency of rational
benevolence: she would give in the readiest manner to people she had
never seen--rather, however, to classes than to individuals. "Pour les
pauvres," she opened her purse freely--against _the poor man_, as
a rule, she kept it closed. In philanthropic schemes for the benefit
of society at large she took a cheerful part; no private sorrow
touched her: no force or mass of suffering concentrated in one heart
had power to pierce hers. Not the agony in Gethsemane, not the death
on Calvary, could have wrung from her eyes one tear.
I say again, Madame was a very great and a very capable woman. That
school offered her for her powers too limited a sphere; she ought to
have swayed a nation: she should have been the leader of a turbulent
legislative assembly. Nobody could have browbeaten her, none irritated
her nerves, exhausted her patience, or over-reached her astuteness. In
her own single person, she could have comprised the duties of a first
minister and a superintendent of police. Wise, firm, faithless;
secret, crafty, passionless; watchful and inscrutable; acute and
insensate--withal perfectly decorous--what more could be desired?
The sensible reader will not suppose that I gained all the knowledge
here condensed for his benefit in one month, or in one half-year. No!
what I saw at first was the thriving outside of a large and
flourishing educational establishment. Here was a great house, full of
healthy, lively girls, all well-dressed and many of them handsome,
gaining knowledge by a marvellously easy method, without painful
exertion or useless waste of spirits; not, perhaps, making very rapid
progress in anything; taking it easy, but still always employed, and
never oppressed. Here was a corps of teachers and masters, more
stringently tasked, as all the real head-labour was to be done by
them, in order to save the pupils, yet having their duties so arranged
that they relieved each other in quick succession whenever the work
was severe: here, in short, was a foreign school; of which the life,
movement, and variety made it a complete and most charming contrast to
many English institutions of the same kind.
Behind the house was a large garden, and, in summer, the pupils almost
lived out of doors amongst the rose-bushes and the fruit-trees. Under
the vast and vine-draped berceau, Madame would take her seat on summer
afternoons, and send for the classes, in turns, to sit round her and
sew and read. Meantime, masters came and went, delivering short and
lively lectures, rather than lessons, and the pupils made notes of
their instructions, or did _not_ make them--just as inclination
prompted; secure that, in case of neglect, they could copy the notes
of their companions. Besides the regular monthly _jours de
sortie_, the Catholic fete-days brought a succession of holidays
all the year round; and sometimes on a bright summer morning, or soft
summer evening; the boarders were taken out for a long walk into the
country, regaled with _gaufres_ and _vin blanc_, or new milk
and _pain bis_, or _pistolets au beurre_ (rolls) and coffee.
All this seemed very pleasant, and Madame appeared goodness itself;
and the teachers not so bad but they might be worse; and the pupils,
perhaps, a little noisy and rough, but types of health and glee.
Thus did the view appear, seen through the enchantment of distance;
but there came a time when distance was to melt for me--when I was to
be called down from my watch-tower of the nursery, whence I had
hitherto made my observations, and was to be compelled into closer
intercourse with this little world of the Rue Fossette.
I was one day sitting up-stairs, as usual, hearing the children their
English lessons, and at the same time turning a silk dress for Madame,
when she came sauntering into the room with that absorbed air and brow
of hard thought she sometimes wore, and which made her look so little
genial. Dropping into a seat opposite mine, she remained some minutes
silent. Desiree, the eldest girl, was reading to me some little essay
of Mrs. Barbauld's, and I was making her translate currently from
English to French as she proceeded, by way of ascertaining that she
comprehended what she read: Madame listened.
Presently, without preface or prelude, she said, almost in the tone of
one making an accusation, "Meess, in England you were a governess?"
"No, Madame," said I smiling, "you are mistaken."
"Is this your first essay at teaching--this attempt with my children?"
I assured her it was. Again she became silent; but looking up, as I
took a pin from the cushion, I found myself an object of study: she
held me under her eye; she seemed turning me round in her thoughts--
measuring my fitness for a purpose, weighing my value in a plan.
Madame had, ere this, scrutinized all I had, and I believe she
esteemed herself cognizant of much that I was; but from that day, for
the space of about a fortnight, she tried me by new tests. She
listened at the nursery door when I was shut in with the children; she
followed me at a cautious distance when I walked out with them,
stealing within ear-shot whenever the trees of park or boulevard
afforded a sufficient screen: a strict preliminary process having thus
been observed, she made a move forward.
One morning, coming on me abruptly, and with the semblance of hurry,
she said she found herself placed in a little dilemma. Mr. Wilson, the
English master, had failed to come at his hour, she feared he was ill;
the pupils were waiting in classe; there was no one to give a lesson;
should I, for once, object to giving a short dictation exercise, just
that the pupils might not have it to say they had missed