I hurried to M. Vandenhuten's
bureau, pushed the document under his nose, and when he had perused
it, took both his hands, and thanked him with unrestrained vivacity.
My vivid words and emphatic gesture moved his Dutch calm to unwonted
sensation. He said he was happy--glad to have served me; but he had
done nothing meriting such thanks. He had not laid out a centime--only
scratched a few words on a sheet of paper.
Again I repeated to him--
"You have made me quite happy, and in a way that suits me; I do not
feel an obligation irksome, conferred by your kind hand; I do not feel
disposed to shun you because you have done me a favour; from this day
you must consent to admit me to your intimate acquaintance, for I shall
hereafter recur again and again to the pleasure of your society."
"Ainsi soit-il," was the reply, accompanied by a smile of benignant
content. I went away with its sunshine in my heart.
CHAPTER XXIII
IT was two o'clock when I returned to my lodgings; my dinner, just
brought in from a neighbouring hotel, smoked on the table; I sat down
thinking to eat--had the plate been heaped with potsherds and broken
glass, instead of boiled beef and haricots, I could not have made a more
signal failure: appetite had forsaken me. Impatient of seeing food
which I could not taste, I put it all aside into a cupboard, and then
demanded, "What shall I do till evening?" for before six P.M. it would
be vain to seek the Rue Notre Dame aux Neiges; its inhabitant (for me
it had but one) was detained by her vocation elsewhere. I walked in the
streets of Brussels, and I walked in my own room from two o'clock
till six; never once in that space of time did I sit down. I was in my
chamber when the last-named hour struck; I had just bathed my face and
feverish hands, and was standing near the glass; my cheek was crimson,
my eye was flame, still all my features looked quite settled and
calm. Descending swiftly the stair and stepping out, I was glad to see
Twilight drawing on in clouds; such shade was to me like a grateful
screen, and the chill of latter Autumn, breathing in a fitful wind from
the north-west, met me as a refreshing coolness. Still I saw it was cold
to others, for the women I passed were wrapped in shawls, and the men
had their coats buttoned close.
When are we quite happy? Was I so then? No; an urgent and growing dread
worried my nerves, and had worried them since the first moment good
tidings had reached me. How was Frances? It was ten weeks since I had
seen her, six since I had heard from her, or of her. I had answered
her letter by a brief note, friendly but calm, in which no mention of
continued correspondence or further visits was made. At that hour my
bark hung on the topmost curl of a wave of fate, and I knew not on what
shoal the onward rush of the billow might hurl it; I would not then
attach her destiny to mine by the slightest thread; if doomed to split
on the rock, or run a aground on the sand-bank, I was resolved no other
vessel should share my disaster: but six weeks was a long time; and
could it be that she was still well and doing well? Were not all sages
agreed in declaring that happiness finds no climax on earth? Dared
I think that but half a street now divided me from the full cup of
contentment--the draught drawn from waters said to flow only in heaven?
I was at the door; I entered the quiet house; I mounted the stairs; the
lobby was void and still, all the doors closed; I looked for the neat
green mat; it lay duly in its place.
"Signal of hope!" I said, and advanced. "But I will be a little calmer;
I am not going to rush in, and get up a scene directly." Forcibly
staying my eager step, I paused on the mat.
"What an absolute hush! Is she in? Is anybody in?" I demanded to
myself. A little tinkle, as of cinders falling from a grate, replied;
a movement--a fire was gently stirred; and the slight rustle of life
continuing, a step paced equably backwards and forwards, backwards and
forwards, in the apartment. Fascinated, I stood, more fixedly fascinated
when a voice rewarded the attention of my strained ear--so low, so
self-addressed, I never fancied the speaker otherwise than alone;
solitude might speak thus in a desert, or in the hall of a forsaken
house.
"'And ne'er but once, my son,' he said,
'Was yon dark cavern trod;
In persecution's iron days,
When the land was left by God.
From Bewley's bog, with slaughter red,
A wanderer hither drew;
And oft he stopp'd and turn'd his head,
As by fits the night-winds blew.
For trampling round by Cheviot-edge
Were heard the troopers keen;
And frequent from the Whitelaw ridge
The death-shot flash'd between,'" &c. &c.
The old Scotch ballad was partly recited, then dropt; a pause ensued;
then another strain followed, in French, of which the purport,
translated, ran as follows:--
I gave, at first, attention close;
Then interest warm ensued;
From interest, as improvement rose,
Succeeded gratitude.
Obedience was no effort soon,
And labour was no pain;
If tired, a word, a glance alone
Would give me strength again.
From others of the studious band,
Ere long he singled me;
But only by more close demand,
And sterner urgency.
The task he from another took,
From me he did reject;
He would no slight omission brook,
And suffer no defect.
If my companions went astray,
He scarce their wanderings blam'd;
If I but falter'd in the way,
His anger fiercely flam'd.
Something stirred in an adjoining chamber; it would not do to be
surprised eaves-dropping; I tapped hastily, And as hastily entered.
Frances was just before me; she had been walking slowly in her room,
and her step was checked by my advent: Twilight only was with her, and
tranquil, ruddy Firelight; to these sisters, the Bright and the Dark,
she had been speaking, ere I entered, in poetry. Sir Walter Scott's
voice, to her a foreign, far-off sound, a mountain echo, had uttered
itself in the first stanzas; the second, I thought, from the style and
the substance, was the language of her own heart. Her face was grave,
its expression concentrated; she bent on me