I was to be held quiet for one night.
The household came to bed, the night-light was lit, the dormitory
hushed. Sleep soon reigned: over those pillows, sleep won an easy
supremacy: contented sovereign over heads and hearts which did not
ache--he passed by the unquiet.
The drug wrought. I know not whether Madame had overcharged or under-
charged the dose; its result was not that she intended. Instead of
stupor, came excitement. I became alive to new thought--to reverie
peculiar in colouring. A gathering call ran among the faculties, their
bugles sang, their trumpets rang an untimely summons. Imagination was
roused from her rest, and she came forth impetuous and venturous. With
scorn she looked on Matter, her mate--"Rise!" she said. "Sluggard!
this night I will have _my_ will; nor shalt thou prevail."
"Look forth and view the night!" was her cry; and when I lifted the
heavy blind from the casement close at hand--with her own royal
gesture, she showed me a moon supreme, in an element deep and
splendid.
To my gasping senses she made the glimmering gloom, the narrow limits,
the oppressive heat of the dormitory, intolerable. She lured me to
leave this den and follow her forth into dew, coolness, and glory.
She brought upon me a strange vision of Villette at midnight.
Especially she showed the park, the summer-park, with its long alleys
all silent, lone and safe; among these lay a huge stone basin--that
basin I knew, and beside which I had often stood--deep-set in the
tree-shadows, brimming with cool water, clear, with a green, leafy,
rushy bed. What of all this? The park-gates were shut up, locked,
sentinelled: the place could not be entered.
Could it not? A point worth considering; and while revolving it, I
mechanically dressed. Utterly incapable of sleeping or lying still--
excited from head to foot--what could I do better than dress?
The gates were locked, soldiers set before them: was there, then, no
admission to the park?
The other day, in walking past, I had seen, without then attending to
the circumstance, a gap in the paling--one stake broken down: I now
saw this gap again in recollection--saw it very plainly--the narrow,
irregular aperture visible between the stems of the lindens, planted
orderly as a colonnade. A man could not have made his way through that
aperture, nor could a stout woman, perhaps not Madame Beck; but I
thought I might: I fancied I should like to try, and once within, at
this hour the whole park would be mine--the moonlight, midnight park!
How soundly the dormitory slept! What deep slumbers! What quiet
breathing! How very still the whole large house! What was the time? I
felt restless to know. There stood a clock in the classe below: what
hindered me from venturing down to consult it? By such a moon, its
large white face and jet black figures must be vividly distinct.
As for hindrance to this step, there offered not so much as a creaking
hinge or a clicking latch. On these hot July nights, close air could
not be tolerated, and the chamber-door stood wide open. Will the
dormitory-planks sustain my tread untraitorous? Yes. I know wherever a
board is loose, and will avoid it. The oak staircase creaks somewhat
as I descend, but not much:--I am in the carre.
The great classe-doors are close shut: they are bolted. On the other
hand, the entrance to the corridor stands open. The classes seem to my
thought, great dreary jails, buried far back beyond thoroughfares, and
for me, filled with spectral and intolerable Memories, laid miserable
amongst their straw and their manacles. The corridor offers a cheerful
vista, leading to the high vestibule which opens direct upon the
street.
Hush!--the clock strikes. Ghostly deep as is the stillness of this
convent, it is only eleven. While my ear follows to silence the hum of
the last stroke, I catch faintly from the built-out capital, a sound
like bells or like a band--a sound where sweetness, where victory,
where mourning blend. Oh, to approach this music nearer, to listen to
it alone by the rushy basin! Let me go--oh, let me go! What hinders,
what does not aid freedom?
There, in the corridor, hangs my garden-costume, my large hat, my
shawl. There is no lock on the huge, heavy, porte-cochere; there is no
key to seek: it fastens with a sort of spring-bolt, not to be opened
from the outside, but which, from within, may be noiselessly
withdrawn. Can I manage it? It yields to my hand, yields with
propitious facility. I wonder as that portal seems almost
spontaneously to unclose--I wonder as I cross the threshold and step
on the paved street, wonder at the strange ease with which this prison
has been forced. It seems as if I had been pioneered invisibly, as if
some dissolving force had gone before me: for myself, I have scarce
made an effort.
Quiet Rue Fossette! I find on this pavement that wanderer-wooing
summer night of which I mused; I see its moon over me; I feel its dew
in the air. But here I cannot stay; I am still too near old haunts: so
close under the dungeon, I can hear the prisoners moan. This solemn
peace is not what I seek, it is not what I can bear: to me the face of
that sky bears the aspect of a world's death. The park also will be
calm--I know, a mortal serenity prevails everywhere--yet let me seek
the park.
I took a route well known, and went up towards the palatial and royal
Haute-Ville; thence the music I had heard certainly floated; it was
hushed now, but it might re-waken. I went on: neither band nor bell
music came to meet me; another sound replaced it, a sound like a
strong tide, a great flow, deepening as I proceeded. Light broke,
movement gathered, chimes pealed--to what was I coming? Entering on
the level of a Grande Place, I found myself, with the suddenness of
magic, plunged amidst a gay, living, joyous crowd.
Villette is one blaze, one broad illumination; the whole world seems
abroad; moonlight and heaven are banished: the town, by her own
flambeaux, beholds her own splendour--gay dresses, grand equipages,
fine horses and gallant riders throng the bright streets. I see even
scores of masks. It is a strange scene, stranger than dreams. But
where is the park?--I ought to be near it. In the midst of this glare
the park must be shadowy and calm--_there_, at least, are neither
torches, lamps, nor