too strong for either of these--Temptation would
shiver their restraints.
I was no pope--I could not boast infallibility: in short, if I stayed,
the probability was that, in three months' time, a practical modern
French novel would be in full process of concoction under the roof of
the unsuspecting Pelet. Now, modern French novels are not to my
taste, either practically or theoretically. Limited as had yet been my
experience of life, I had once had the opportunity of contemplating,
near at hand, an example of the results produced by a course of
interesting and romantic domestic treachery. No golden halo of fiction
was about this example, I saw it bare and real, and it was very
loathsome. I saw a mind degraded by the practice of mean subterfuge, by
the habit of perfidious deception, and a body depraved by the infectious
influence of the vice-polluted soul. I had suffered much from the forced
and prolonged view of this spectacle; those sufferings I did not now
regret, for their simple recollection acted as a most wholesome antidote
to temptation. They had inscribed on my reason the conviction that
unlawful pleasure, trenching on another's rights, is delusive and
envenomed pleasure--its hollowness disappoints at the time, its poison
cruelly tortures afterwards, its effects deprave for ever.
From all this resulted the conclusion that I must leave Pelet's, and
that instantly; "but," said Prudence, "you know not where to go, nor how
to live;" and then the dream of true love came over me: Frances Henri
seemed to stand at my side; her slender waist to invite my arm; her
hand to court my hand; I felt it was made to nestle in mine; I could not
relinquish my right to it, nor could I withdraw my eyes for ever from
hers, where I saw so much happiness, such a correspondence of heart with
heart; over whose expression I had such influence; where I could kindle
bliss, infuse awe, stir deep delight, rouse sparkling spirit, and
sometimes waken pleasurable dread. My hopes to will and possess, my
resolutions to merit and rise, rose in array against me; and here I was
about to plunge into the gulf of absolute destitution; "and all this,"
suggested an inward voice, "because you fear an evil which may never
happen!" "It will happen; you KNOW it will," answered that stubborn
monitor, Conscience. "Do what you feel is right; obey me, and even in
the sloughs of want I will plant for you firm footing." And then, as I
walked fast along the road, there rose upon me a strange, inly-felt idea
of some Great Being, unseen, but all present, who in His beneficence
desired only my welfare, and now watched the struggle of good and evil
in my heart, and waited to see whether I should obey His voice, heard in
the whispers of my conscience, or lend an ear to the sophisms by which
His enemy and mine--the Spirit of Evil--sought to lead me astray.
Rough and steep was the path indicated by divine suggestion; mossy and
declining the green way along which Temptation strewed flowers; but
whereas, methought, the Deity of Love, the Friend of all that exists,
would smile well-pleased were I to gird up my loins and address myself
to the rude ascent; so, on the other hand, each inclination to the
velvet declivity seemed to kindle a gleam of triumph on the brow of the
man-hating, God-defying demon. Sharp and short I turned round; fast I
retraced my steps; in half an hour I was again at M. Pelet's: I sought
him in his study; brief parley, concise explanation sufficed; my manner
proved that I was resolved; he, perhaps, at heart approved my
decision. After twenty minutes' conversation, I re-entered my own room,
self-deprived of the means of living, self-sentenced to leave my present
home, with the short notice of a week in which to provide another.
CHAPTER XXI.
DIRECTLY as I closed the door, I saw laid on the table two letters; my
thought was, that they were notes of invitation from the friends of some
of my pupils; I had received such marks of attention occasionally, and
with me, who had no friends, correspondence of more interest was out
of the question; the postman's arrival had never yet been an event of
interest to me since I came to Brussels. I laid my hand carelessly on
the documents, and coldly and slowly glancing at them, I prepared to
break the seals; my eye was arrested and my hand too; I saw what excited
me, as if I had found a vivid picture where I expected only to discover
a blank page: on one cover was an English postmark; on the other, a
lady's clear, fine autograph; the last I opened first:--
"MONSIEUR,
"I FOUND out what you had done the very morning after your
visit to me; you might be sure I should dust the china, every day; and,
as no one but you had been in my room for a week, and as fairy-money is
not current in Brussels, I could not doubt who left the twenty francs
on the chimney-piece. I thought I heard you stir the vase when I was
stooping to look for your glove under the table, and I wondered you
should imagine it had got into such a little cup. Now, monsieur, the
money is not mine, and I shall not keep it; I will not send it in this
note because it might be lost--besides, it is heavy; but I will restore
it to you the first time I see you, and you must make no difficulties
about taking it; because, in the first place, I am sure, monsieur,
you can understand that one likes to pay one's debts; that it is
satisfactory to owe no man anything; and, in the second place, I can now
very well afford to be honest, as I am provided with a situation. This
last circumstance is, indeed, the reason of my writing to you, for it
is pleasant to communicate good news; and, in these days, I have only my
master to whom I can tell anything.
"A week ago, monsieur, I was sent for by a Mrs. Wharton, an English
lady; her eldest daughter was going to be married, and some rich
relation having made her a present of a veil and dress in costly old
lace, as precious, they said, almost as jewels, but a little damaged by
time, I was commissioned to