first, of merely getting a
better view of his face, which had struck me when I entered as bearing
a close and picturesque resemblance to that of a black and sallow
tiger. Twice did I enjoy this side-view with impunity, advancing and
receding unseen; the third time my eye had scarce dawned beyond the
obscuration of the desk, when it was caught and transfixed through its
very pupil--transfixed by the "lunettes." Rosine was right; these
utensils had in them a blank and immutable terror, beyond the mobile
wrath of the wearer's own unglazed eyes.
I now found the advantage of proximity: these short-sighted "lunettes"
were useless for the inspection of a criminal under Monsieur's nose;
accordingly, he doffed them, and he and I stood on more equal terms.
I am glad I was not really much afraid of him--that, indeed, close in
his presence, I felt no terror at all; for upon his demanding cord and
gibbet to execute the sentence recently pronounced, I was able to
furnish him with a needleful of embroidering thread with such
accommodating civility as could not but allay some portion at least of
his surplus irritation. Of course I did not parade this courtesy
before public view: I merely handed the thread round the angle of the
desk, and attached it, ready noosed, to the barred back of the
Professor's chair.
"Que me voulez-vous?" said he in a growl of which the music was wholly
confined to his chest and throat, for he kept his teeth clenched; and
seemed registering to himself an inward vow that nothing earthly
should wring from him a smile.
My answer commenced uncompromisingly: "Monsieur," I said, "je veux
l'impossible, des choses inouies;" and thinking it best not to mince
matters, but to administer the "douche" with decision, in a low but
quick voice, I delivered the Athenian message, floridly exaggerating
its urgency.
Of course, he would not hear a word of it. "He would not go; he would
not leave his present class, let all the officials of Villette send
for him. He would not put himself an inch out of his way at the
bidding of king, cabinet, and chambers together."
I knew, however, that he _must_ go; that, talk as he would, both
his duty and interest commanded an immediate and literal compliance
with the summons: I stood, therefore, waiting in silence, as if he had
not yet spoken. He asked what more I wanted.
"Only Monsieur's answer to deliver to the commissionaire."
He waved an impatient negative.
I ventured to stretch my hand to the bonnet-grec which lay in grim
repose on the window-sill. He followed this daring movement with his
eye, no doubt in mixed pity and amazement at its presumption.
"Ah!" he muttered, "if it came to that--if Miss Lucy meddled with his
bonnet-grec--she might just put it on herself, turn garcon for the
occasion, and benevolently go to the Athenee in his stead."
With great respect, I laid the bonnet on the desk, where its tassel
seemed to give me an awful nod.
"I'll write a note of apology--that will do!" said he, still bent on
evasion.
Knowing well it would _not_ do, I gently pushed the bonnet
towards his hand. Thus impelled, it slid down the polished slope of
the varnished and unbaized desk, carried before it the light steel-
framed "lunettes," and, fearful to relate, they fell to the estrade. A
score of times ere now had I seen them fall and receive no damage--
_this_ time, as Lucy Snowe's hapless luck would have it, they so
fell that each clear pebble became a shivered and shapeless star.
Now, indeed, dismay seized me--dismay and regret. I knew the value of
these "lunettes": M. Paul's sight was peculiar, not easily fitted, and
these glasses suited him. I had heard him call them his treasures: as
I picked them up, cracked and worthless, my hand trembled. Frightened
through all my nerves I was to see the mischief I had done, but I
think I was even more sorry than afraid. For some seconds I dared not
look the bereaved Professor in the face; he was the first to speak.
"La!" said he: "me voila veuf de mes lunettes! I think Mademoiselle
Lucy will now confess that the cord and gallows are amply earned; she
trembles in anticipation of her doom. Ah, traitress! traitress! You
are resolved to have me quite blind and helpless in your hands!"
I lifted my eyes: his face, instead of being irate, lowering, and
furrowed, was overflowing with the smile, coloured with the bloom I
had seen brightening it that evening at the Hotel Crecy. He was not
angry--not even grieved. For the real injury he showed himself full of
clemency; under the real provocation, patient as a saint. This event,
which seemed so untoward--which I thought had ruined at once my chance
of successful persuasion--proved my best help. Difficult of management
so long as I had done him no harm, he became graciously pliant as soon
as I stood in his presence a conscious and contrite offender.
Still gently railing at me as "une forte femme--une Anglaise terrible
--une petite casse-tout"--he declared that he dared not but obey one
who had given such an instance of her dangerous prowess; it was
absolutely like the "grand Empereur smashing the vase to inspire
dismay." So, at last, crowning himself with his bonnet-grec, and
taking his ruined "lunettes" from my hand with a clasp of kind pardon
and encouragement, he made his bow, and went off to the Athenee in
first-rate humour and spirits.
* * * * *
After all this amiability, the reader will be sorry for my sake to
hear that I was quarrelling with M. Paul again before night; yet so it
was, and I could not help it.
It was his occasional custom--and a very laudable, acceptable custom,
too--to arrive of an evening, always a l'improviste, unannounced,
burst in on the silent hour of study, establish a sudden despotism
over us and our occupations, cause books to be put away, work-bags to
be brought out, and, drawing forth a single thick volume, or a handful
of pamphlets, substitute for the besotted "lecture pieuse," drawled by
a sleepy pupil, some tragedy made grand by grand reading, ardent by
fiery action--some drama, whereof, for my part, I rarely studied the
intrinsic merit; for M. Emanuel made it a vessel for an outpouring,
and filled it with his native verve and passion like a cup with a
vital brewage. Or else he would flash through our conventual darkness
a