pensive and anxious.
She _did_ listen, and watch, when evening closed; but it was in
stillest sort: walking the drawing-room with quite noiseless step. She
checked at intervals her velvet march; inclined her ear, and consulted
the night sounds: I should rather say, the night silence; for now, at
last, the wind was fallen. The sky, relieved of its avalanche, lay
naked and pale: through the barren boughs of the avenue we could see
it well, and note also the polar splendour of the new-year moon--an
orb white as a world of ice. Nor was it late when we saw also the
return of the carriage.
Paulina had no dance of welcome for this evening. It was with a sort
of gravity that she took immediate possession of her father, as he
entered the room; but she at once made him her entire property, led
him to the seat of her choice, and, while softly showering round him
honeyed words of commendation for being so good and coming home so
soon, you would have thought it was entirely by the power of her
little hands he was put into his chair, and settled and arranged; for
the strong man seemed to take pleasure in wholly yielding himself to
this dominion-potent only by love.
Graham did not appear till some minutes after the Count. Paulina half
turned when his step was heard: they spoke, but only a word or two;
their fingers met a moment, but obviously with slight contact. Paulina
remained beside her father; Graham threw himself into a seat on the
other side of the room.
It was well that Mrs. Bretton and Mr. Home had a great deal to say to
each other-almost an inexhaustible fund of discourse in old
recollections; otherwise, I think, our party would have been but a
still one that evening.
After tea, Paulina's quick needle and pretty golden thimble were
busily plied by the lamp-light, but her tongue rested, and her eyes
seemed reluctant to raise often their lids, so smooth and so full-
fringed. Graham, too, must have been tired with his day's work: he
listened dutifully to his elders and betters, said very little
himself, and followed with his eye the gilded glance of Paulina's
thimble; as if it had been some bright moth on the wing, or the golden
head of some darting little yellow serpent.
CHAPTER XXVI.
A BURIAL.
From this date my life did not want variety; I went out a good deal,
with the entire consent of Madame Beck, who perfectly approved the
grade of my acquaintance. That worthy directress had never from the
first treated me otherwise than with respect; and when she found that
I was liable to frequent invitations from a chateau and a great hotel,
respect improved into distinction.
Not that she was fulsome about it: Madame, in all things worldly, was
in nothing weak; there was measure and sense in her hottest pursuit of
self-interest, calm and considerateness in her closest clutch of gain;
without, then, laying herself open to my contempt as a time-server and
a toadie, she marked with tact that she was pleased people connected
with her establishment should frequent such associates as must
cultivate and elevate, rather than those who might deteriorate and
depress. She never praised either me or my friends; only once when she
was sitting in the sun in the garden, a cup of coffee at her elbow and
the Gazette in her hand, looking very comfortable, and I came up and
asked leave of absence for the evening, she delivered herself in this
gracious sort:--
"Oui, oui, ma bonne amie: je vous donne la permission de coeur et de
gre. Votre travail dans ma maison a toujours ete admirable, rempli de
zele et de discretion: vous avez bien le droit de vous amuser. Sortez
donc tant que vous voudrez. Quant a votre choix de connaissances, j'en
suis contente; c'est sage, digne, laudable."
She closed her lips and resumed the Gazette.
The reader will not too gravely regard the little circumstance that
about this time the triply-enclosed packet of five letters temporarily
disappeared from my bureau. Blank dismay was naturally my first
sensation on making the discovery; but in a moment I took heart of
grace.
"Patience!" whispered I to myself. "Let me say nothing, but wait
peaceably; they will come back again."
And they did come back: they had only been on a short visit to
Madame's chamber; having passed their examination, they came back duly
and truly: I found them all right the next day.
I wonder what she thought of my correspondence? What estimate did she
form of Dr. John Bretton's epistolary powers? In what light did the
often very pithy thoughts, the generally sound, and sometimes original
opinions, set, without pretension, in an easily-flowing, spirited
style, appear to her? How did she like that genial, half humorous
vein, which to me gave such delight? What did she think of the few
kind words scattered here and there-not thickly, as the diamonds were
scattered in the valley of Sindbad, but sparely, as those gems lie in
unfabled beds? Oh, Madame Beck! how seemed these things to you?
I think in Madame Beck's eyes the five letters found a certain favour.
One day after she had _borrowed_ them of me (in speaking of so
suave a little woman, one ought to use suave terms), I caught her
examining me with a steady contemplative gaze, a little puzzled, but
not at all malevolent. It was during that brief space between lessons,
when the pupils turned out into the court for a quarter of an hour's
recreation; she and I remained in the first classe alone: when I met
her eye, her thoughts forced themselves partially through her lips.
"Il y a," said she, "quelquechose de bien remarquable dans le
caractere Anglais."
"How, Madame?"
She gave a little laugh, repeating the word "how" in English.
"Je ne saurais vous dire 'how;' mais, enfin, les Anglais ont des idees
a eux, en amitie, en amour, en tout. Mais au moins il n'est pas besoin
de les surveiller," she added, getting up and trotting away like the
compact little pony she was.
"Then I hope," murmured I to myself, "you will graciously let alone my
letters for the future."
Alas! something came rushing into my eyes, dimming utterly their
vision, blotting from sight the schoolroom, the garden, the bright
winter sun, as I remembered that never more would letters, such as she
had read, come to me. I had seen the last of them. That goodly river
on whose banks