thought you always found her house
charming?"
"I have not been to Mrs. Cholmondeley's."
"Indeed! Have you made new acquaintance?"
"My uncle de Bassompierre is come."
"Your uncle de Bassompierre! Are you not glad?--I thought he was a
favourite."
"You thought wrong: the man is odious; I hate him."
"Because he is a foreigner? or for what other reason of equal weight?"
"He is not a foreigner. The man is English enough, goodness knows; and
had an English name till three or four years ago; but his mother was a
foreigner, a de Bassompierre, and some of her family are dead and have
left him estates, a title, and this name: he is quite a great man
now."
"Do you hate him for that reason?"
"Don't I know what mamma says about him? He is not my own uncle, but
married mamma's sister. Mamma detests him; she says he killed aunt
Ginevra with unkindness: he looks like a bear. Such a dismal evening!"
she went on. "I'll go no more to his big hotel. Fancy me walking into
a room alone, and a great man fifty years old coming forwards, and
after a few minutes' conversation actually turning his back upon me,
and then abruptly going out of the room. Such odd ways! I daresay his
conscience smote him, for they all say at home I am the picture of
aunt Ginevra. Mamma often declares the likeness is quite ridiculous."
"Were you the only visitor?"
"The only visitor? Yes; then there was missy, my cousin: little
spoiled, pampered thing."
"M. de Bassompierre has a daughter?"
"Yes, yes: don't tease one with questions. Oh, dear! I am so tired."
She yawned. Throwing herself without ceremony on my bed she added, "It
seems Mademoiselle was nearly crushed to a jelly in a hubbub at the
theatre some weeks ago."
"Ah! indeed. And they live at a large hotel in the Rue Crecy?"
"Justement. How do _you_ know?"
"I have been there."
"Oh, you have? Really! You go everywhere in these days. I suppose
Mother Bretton took you. She and Esculapius have the _entree_ of
the de Bassompierre apartments: it seems 'my son John' attended missy
on the occasion of her accident--Accident? Bah! All affectation! I
don't think she was squeezed more than she richly deserves for her
airs. And now there is quite an intimacy struck up: I heard something
about 'auld lang syne,' and what not. Oh, how stupid they all were!"
"_All!_ You said you were the only visitor."
"Did I? You see one forgets to particularize an old woman and her
boy."
"Dr. and Mrs. Bretton were at M. de Bassompierre's this evening?"
"Ay, ay! as large as life; and missy played the hostess. What a
conceited doll it is!"
Soured and listless, Miss Fanshawe was beginning to disclose the
causes of her prostrate condition. There had been a retrenchment of
incense, a diversion or a total withholding of homage and attention
coquetry had failed of effect, vanity had undergone mortification. She
lay fuming in the vapours.
"Is Miss de Bassompierre quite well now?" I asked.
"As well as you or I, no doubt; but she is an affected little thing,
and gave herself invalid airs to attract medical notice. And to see
the old dowager making her recline on a couch, and 'my son John'
prohibiting excitement, etcetera--faugh! the scene was quite
sickening."
"It would not have been so if the object of attention had been
changed: if you had taken Miss de Bassompierre's place."
"Indeed! I hate 'my son John!'"
"'My son John!'--whom do you indicate by that name? Dr. Bretton's
mother never calls him so."
"Then she ought. A clownish, bearish John he is."
"You violate the truth in saying so; and as the whole of my patience
is now spun off the distaff, I peremptorily desire you to rise from
that bed, and vacate this room."
"Passionate thing! Your face is the colour of a coquelicot. I wonder
what always makes you so mighty testy a l'endroit du gros Jean? 'John
Anderson, my Joe, John!' Oh, the distinguished name!"
Thrilling with exasperation, to which it would have been sheer folly
to have given vent--for there was no contending with that
unsubstantial feather, that mealy-winged moth--I extinguished my
taper, locked my bureau, and left her, since she would not leave me.
Small-beer as she was, she had turned insufferably acid.
The morrow was Thursday and a half-holiday. Breakfast was over; I had
withdrawn to the first classe. The dreaded hour, the post-hour, was
nearing, and I sat waiting it, much as a ghost-seer might wait his
spectre. Less than ever was a letter probable; still, strive as I
would, I could not forget that it was possible. As the moments
lessened, a restlessness and fear almost beyond the average assailed
me. It was a day of winter east wind, and I had now for some time
entered into that dreary fellowship with the winds and their changes,
so little known, so incomprehensible to the healthy. The north and
east owned a terrific influence, making all pain more poignant, all
sorrow sadder. The south could calm, the west sometimes cheer: unless,
indeed, they brought on their wings the burden of thunder-clouds,
under the weight and warmth of which all energy died.
Bitter and dark as was this January day, I remember leaving the
classe, and running down without bonnet to the bottom of the long
garden, and then lingering amongst the stripped shrubs, in the forlorn
hope that the postman's ring might occur while I was out of hearing,
and I might thus be spared the thrill which some particular nerve or
nerves, almost gnawed through with the unremitting tooth of a fixed
idea, were becoming wholly unfit to support. I lingered as long as I
dared without fear of attracting attention by my absence. I muffled my
head in my apron, and stopped my ears in terror of the torturing
clang, sure to be followed by such blank silence, such barren vacuum
for me. At last I ventured to re-enter the first classe, where, as it
was not yet nine o'clock, no pupils had been admitted. The first thing
seen was a white object on my black desk, a white, flat object. The
post had, indeed, arrived; by me unheard. Rosine had visited my cell,
and, like some angel, had left behind her a bright token of her
presence. That shining thing on the desk was indeed a letter, a real
letter; I saw so much at the distance of three yards, and as I had but
one correspondent on earth, from