Mons. and Madame Pelet! You are always
talking about them. I wish to the gods you had wed Mdlle. Zoraide
yourself!"
"Was that young gentlewoman not Mdlle. Zoraide?"
"No; nor Madame Zoraide either."
"Why did you tell a lie, then?"
"I told no lie; but you are is such a hurry. She is a pupil of mine--a
Swiss girl."
"And of course you are going to be married to her? Don't deny that."
"Married! I think I shall--if Fate spares us both ten weeks longer. That
is my little wild strawberry, Hunsden, whose sweetness made me careless
of your hothouse grapes."
"Stop! No boasting--no heroics; I won't hear them. What is she? To what
caste does she belong?"
I smiled. Hunsden unconsciously laid stress on the word caste, and, in
fact, republican, lordhater as he was, Hunsden was as proud of his old
----shire blood, of his descent and family standing, respectable and
respected through long generations back, as any peer in the realm of
his Norman race and Conquest-dated title. Hunsden would as little have
thought of taking a wife from a caste inferior to his own, as a Stanley
would think of mating with a Cobden. I enjoyed the surprise I should
give; I enjoyed the triumph of my practice over his theory; and leaning
over the table, and uttering the words slowly but with repressed glee, I
said concisely--
"She is a lace-mender."
Hunsden examined me. He did not SAY he was surprised, but surprised he
was; he had his own notions of good breeding. I saw he suspected I
was going to take some very rash step; but repressing declamation or
remonstrance, he only answered--
"Well, you are the best; judge of your own affairs. A lace-mender may
make a good wife as well as a lady; but of course you have taken care
to ascertain thoroughly that since she has not education, fortune or
station, she is well furnished with such natural qualities as you think
most likely to conduce to your happiness. Has she many relations?"
"None in Brussels."
"That is better. Relations are often the real evil in such cases. I
cannot but think that a train of inferior connections would have been a
bore to you to your life's end."
After sitting in silence a little while longer, Hunsden rose, and was
quietly bidding me good evening; the polite, considerate manner in which
he offered me his hand (a thing he had never done before), convinced me
that he thought I had made a terrible fool of myself; and that, ruined
and thrown away as I was, it was no time for sarcasm or cynicism, or
indeed for anything but indulgence and forbearance.
"Good night, William," he said, in a really soft voice, while his face
looked benevolently compassionate. "Good night, lad. I wish you and your
future wife much prosperity; and I hope she will satisfy your fastidious
soul."
I had much ado to refrain from laughing as I beheld the magnanimous pity
of his mien; maintaining, however, a grave air, I said:--
"I thought you would have liked to have seen Mdlle. Henri?"
"Oh, that is the name! Yes--if it would be convenient, I should like to
see her--but----." He hesitated.
"Well?"
"I should on no account wish to intrude."
"Come, then," said I. We set out. Hunsden no doubt regarded me as a
rash, imprudent man, thus to show my poor little grisette sweetheart,
in her poor little unfurnished grenier; but he prepared to act the real
gentleman, having, in fact, the kernel of that character, under the
harsh husk it pleased him to wear by way of mental mackintosh. He talked
affably, and even gently, as we went along the street; he had never been
so civil to me in his life. We reached the house, entered, ascended the
stair; on gaining the lobby, Hunsden turned to mount a narrower stair
which led to a higher story; I saw his mind was bent on the attics.
"Here, Mr. Hunsden," said I quietly, tapping at Frances' door. He
turned; in his genuine politeness he was a little disconcerted at
having made the mistake; his eye reverted to the green mat, but he said
nothing.
We walked in, and Frances rose from her seat near the table to receive
us; her mourning attire gave her a recluse, rather conventual, but
withal very distinguished look; its grave simplicity added nothing
to beauty, but much to dignity; the finish of the white collar and
manchettes sufficed for a relief to the merino gown of solemn black;
ornament was forsworn. Frances curtsied with sedate grace, looking, as
she always did, when one first accosted her, more a woman to respect
than to love; I introduced Mr. Hunsden, and she expressed her happiness
at making his acquaintance in French. The pure and polished accent, the
low yet sweet and rather full voice, produced their effect immediately;
Hunsden spoke French in reply; I had not heard him speak that language
before; he managed it very well. I retired to the window-seat; Mr.
Hunsden, at his hostess's invitation, occupied a chair near the hearth;
from my position I could see them both, and the room too, at a glance.
The room was so clean and bright, it looked like a little polished
cabinet; a glass filled with flowers in the centre of the table, a
fresh rose in each china cup on the mantelpiece gave it an air of FETE,
Frances was serious, and Mr. Hunsden subdued, but both mutually polite;
they got on at the French swimmingly: ordinary topics were discussed
with great state and decorum; I thought I had never seen two such models
of propriety, for Hunsden (thanks to the constraint of the foreign
tongue) was obliged to shape his phrases, and measure his sentences,
with a care that forbade any eccentricity. At last England was
mentioned, and Frances proceeded to ask questions. Animated by degrees,
she began to change, just as a grave night-sky changes at the approach
of sunrise: first it seemed as if her forehead cleared, then her eyes
glittered, her features relaxed, and became quite mobile; her subdued
complexion grew warm and transparent; to me, she now looked pretty;
before, she had only looked ladylike.
She had many things to say to the Englishman just fresh from his
island-country, and she urged him with an enthusiasm of curiosity, which
ere long thawed Hunsden's reserve as fire thaws a congealed viper. I use
this not very flattering comparison because he vividly reminded me of a
snake waking from torpor, as he