for such a repulse she was too good-natured. She would consent to
seem to forget what I had done, and retain the offering with lady-like
quiet and easy oblivion. Under such circumstances, how can a man build
on acceptance of his presents as a favourable symptom? For my part,
were I to offer her all I have, and she to take it, such is her
incapacity to be swayed by sordid considerations, I should not venture
to believe the transaction advanced me one step."
"Dr. John," I began, "Love is blind;" but just then a blue subtle ray
sped sideways from Dr. John's eye: it reminded me of old days, it
reminded me of his picture: it half led me to think that part, at
least, of his professed persuasion of Miss Fanshawe's _naivete_
was assumed; it led me dubiously to conjecture that perhaps, in spite
of his passion for her beauty, his appreciation of her foibles might
possibly be less mistaken, more clear-sighted, than from his general
language was presumable. After all it might be only a chance look, or
at best the token of a merely momentary impression. Chance or
intentional real or imaginary, it closed the conversation.
CHAPTER XIX.
THE CLEOPATRA.
My stay at La Terrasse was prolonged a fortnight beyond the close of
the vacation. Mrs. Bretton's kind management procured me this respite.
Her son having one day delivered the dictum that "Lucy was not yet
strong enough to go back to that den of a pensionnat," she at once
drove over to the Rue Fossette, had an interview with the directress,
and procured the indulgence, on the plea of prolonged rest and change
being necessary to perfect recovery. Hereupon, however, followed an
attention I could very well have dispensed with, viz--a polite call
from Madame Beck.
That lady--one fine day--actually came out in a fiacre as far as the
chateau. I suppose she had resolved within herself to see what manner
of place Dr. John inhabited. Apparently, the pleasant site and neat
interior surpassed her expectations; she eulogized all she saw,
pronounced the blue salon "une piece magnifique," profusely
congratulated me on the acquisition of friends, "tellement dignes,
aimables, et respectables," turned also a neat compliment in my
favour, and, upon Dr. John coming in, ran up to him with the utmost
buoyancy, opening at the same time such a fire of rapid language, all
sparkling with felicitations and protestations about his "chateau,"--
"madame sa mere, la digne chatelaine:" also his looks; which, indeed,
were very flourishing, and at the moment additionally embellished by
the good-natured but amused smile with which he always listened to
Madame's fluent and florid French. In short, Madame shone in her very
best phase that day, and came in and went out quite a living
catherine-wheel of compliments, delight, and affability. Half
purposely, and half to ask some question about school-business, I
followed her to the carriage, and looked in after she was seated and
the door closed. In that brief fraction of time what a change had been
wrought! An instant ago, all sparkles and jests, she now sat sterner
than a judge and graver than a sage. Strange little woman!
I went back and teased Dr. John about Madame's devotion to him. How he
laughed! What fun shone in his eyes as he recalled some of her fine
speeches, and repeated them, imitating her voluble delivery! He had an
acute sense of humour, and was the finest company in the world--when
he could forget Miss Fanshawe.
* * * * *
To "sit in sunshine calm and sweet" is said to be excellent for weak
people; it gives them vital force. When little Georgette Beck was
recovering from her illness, I used to take her in my arms and walk
with her in the garden by the hour together, beneath a certain wall
hung with grapes, which the Southern sun was ripening: that sun
cherished her little pale frame quite as effectually as it mellowed
and swelled the clustering fruit.
There are human tempers, bland, glowing, and genial, within whose
influence it is as good for the poor in spirit to live, as it is for
the feeble in frame to bask in the glow of noon. Of the number of
these choice natures were certainly both Dr. Bretton's and his
mother's. They liked to communicate happiness, as some like to
occasion misery: they did it instinctively; without fuss, and
apparently with little consciousness; the means to give pleasure rose
spontaneously in their minds. Every day while I stayed with them, some
little plan was proposed which resulted in beneficial enjoyment. Fully
occupied as was Dr. John's time, he still made it in his way to
accompany us in each brief excursion. I can hardly tell how he managed
his engagements; they were numerous, yet by dint of system, he classed
them in an order which left him a daily period of liberty. I often saw
him hard-worked, yet seldom over-driven, and never irritated,
confused, or oppressed. What he did was accomplished with the ease and
grace of all-sufficing strength; with the bountiful cheerfulness of
high and unbroken energies. Under his guidance I saw, in that one
happy fortnight, more of Villette, its environs, and its inhabitants,
than I had seen in the whole eight months of my previous residence. He
took me to places of interest in the town, of whose names I had not
before so much as heard; with willingness and spirit he communicates.
much noteworthy information. He never seemed to think it a trouble to
talk to me, and, I am sure, it was never a task to me to listen. It
was not his way to treat subjects coldly and vaguely; he rarely
generalized, never prosed. He seemed to like nice details almost as
much as I liked them myself: he seemed observant of character: and
not superficially observant, either. These points gave the quality of
interest to his discourse; and the fact of his speaking direct from
his own resources, and not borrowing or stealing from books--here a
dry fact, and there a trite phrase, and elsewhere a hackneyed opinion
--ensured a freshness, as welcome as it was rare. Before my eyes, too,
his disposition seemed to unfold another phase; to pass to a fresh
day: to rise in new and nobler dawn.
His mother possessed a good development of benevolence, but he owned a
better and larger. I found, on accompanying him to the Basse-Ville--
the poor and crowded quarter of the city--that his errands there were
as much