him
suddenly up to apply new tests: he sent him on irksome errands when he
was staggering with weariness; he tried the temper, the sense, and the
health; and it was only when every severest test had been applied and
endured, when the most corrosive aquafortis had been used, and failed
to tarnish the ore, that he admitted it genuine, and, still in clouded
silence, stamped it with his deep brand of approval.
I speak not ignorant of these evils.
Till the date at which the last chapter closes, M. Paul had not been
my professor--he had not given me lessons, but about that time,
accidentally hearing me one day acknowledge an ignorance of some
branch of education (I think it was arithmetic), which would have
disgraced a charity-school boy, as he very truly remarked, he took me
in hand, examined me first, found me, I need not say, abundantly
deficient, gave me some books and appointed me some tasks.
He did this at first with pleasure, indeed with unconcealed
exultation, condescending to say that he believed I was "bonne et pas
trop faible" (i.e. well enough disposed, and not wholly destitute of
parts), but, owing he supposed to adverse circumstances, "as yet in a
state of wretchedly imperfect mental development."
The beginning of all effort has indeed with me been marked by a
preternatural imbecility. I never could, even in forming a common
acquaintance, assert or prove a claim to average quickness. A
depressing and difficult passage has prefaced every new page I have
turned in life.
So long as this passage lasted, M. Paul was very kind, very good, very
forbearing; he saw the sharp pain inflicted, and felt the weighty
humiliation imposed by my own sense of incapacity; and words can
hardly do justice to his tenderness and helpfulness. His own eyes
would moisten, when tears of shame and effort clouded mine; burdened
as he was with work, he would steal half his brief space of recreation
to give to me.
But, strange grief! when that heavy and overcast dawn began at last to
yield to day; when my faculties began to struggle themselves, free,
and my time of energy and fulfilment came; when I voluntarily doubled,
trebled, quadrupled the tasks he set, to please him as I thought, his
kindness became sternness; the light changed in his eyes from a beam
to a spark; he fretted, he opposed, he curbed me imperiously; the more
I did, the harder I worked, the less he seemed content. Sarcasms of
which the severity amazed and puzzled me, harassed my ears; then
flowed out the bitterest inuendoes against the "pride of intellect." I
was vaguely threatened with I know not what doom, if I ever trespassed
the limits proper to my sex, and conceived a contraband appetite for
unfeminine knowledge. Alas! I had no such appetite. What I loved, it
joyed me by any effort to content; but the noble hunger for science in
the abstract--the godlike thirst after discovery--these feelings were
known to me but by briefest flashes.
Yet, when M. Paul sneered at me, I wanted to possess them more fully;
his injustice stirred in me ambitious wishes--it imparted a strong
stimulus--it gave wings to aspiration.
In the beginning, before I had penetrated to motives, that
uncomprehended sneer of his made my heart ache, but by-and-by it only
warmed the blood in my veins, and sent added action to my pulses.
Whatever my powers--feminine or the contrary--God had given them, and
I felt resolute to be ashamed of no faculty of his bestowal.
The combat was very sharp for a time. I seemed to have lost M. Paul's
affection; he treated me strangely. In his most unjust moments he
would insinuate that I had deceived him when I appeared, what he
called "faible"--that is incompetent; he said I had feigned a false
incapacity. Again, he would turn suddenly round and accuse me of the
most far-fetched imitations and impossible plagiarisms, asserting that
I had extracted the pith out of books I had not so much as heard of--
and over the perusal of which I should infallibly have fallen down in
a sleep as deep as that of Eutychus.
Once, upon his preferring such an accusation, I turned upon him--I
rose against him. Gathering an armful of his books out of my desk, I
filled my apron and poured them in a heap upon his estrade, at his
feet.
"Take them away, M. Paul," I said, "and teach me no more. I never
asked to be made learned, and you compel me to feel very profoundly
that learning is not happiness."
And returning to my desk, I laid my head on my arms, nor would I speak
to him for two days afterwards. He pained and chagrined me. His
affection had been very sweet and dear--a pleasure new and
incomparable: now that this seemed withdrawn, I cared not for his
lessons.
The books, however, were not taken away; they were all restored with
careful hand to their places, and he came as usual to teach me. He
made his peace somehow--too readily, perhaps: I ought to have stood
out longer, but when he looked kind and good, and held out his hand
with amity, memory refused to reproduce with due force his oppressive
moments. And then, reconcilement is always sweet!
On a certain morning a message came from my godmother, inviting me to
attend some notable lecture to be delivered in the same public rooms
before described. Dr. John had brought the message himself, and
delivered it verbally to Rosine, who had not scrupled to follow the
steps of M. Emanuel, then passing to the first classe, and, in his
presence, stand "carrement" before my desk, hand in apron-pocket, and
rehearse the same, saucily and aloud, concluding with the words,
"Qu'il est vraiment beau, Mademoiselle, ce jeune docteur! Quels yeux--
quel regard! Tenez! J'en ai le coeur tout emu!"
When she was gone, my professor demanded of me why I suffered "cette
fille effrontee, cette creature sans pudeur," to address me in such
terms.
I had no pacifying answer to give. The terms were precisely such as
Rosine--a young lady in whose skull the organs of reverence and
reserve were not largely developed--was in the constant habit of
using. Besides, what she said about the young doctor was true enough.
Graham _was_ handsome; he had fine eyes and a thrilling: glance.
An observation to that effect actually formed itself into sound on my
lips.
"Elle ne dit que la verite," I said.
"Ah! vous trouvez?"
"Mais, sans doute."
The lesson to which