herself, when she would have obstructed a
kind farewell. A cordial word from his lips, or a gentle look from his
eyes, would do me good, for all the span of life that remained to me;
it would be comfort in the last strait of loneliness; I would take it--I
would taste the elixir, and pride should not spill the cup.
The interview would be short, of course: he would say to me just what
he had said to each of the assembled pupils; he would take and hold my
hand two minutes; he would touch my cheek with his lips for the first,
last, only time--and then--no more. Then, indeed, the final parting,
then the wide separation, the great gulf I could not pass to go to
him--across which, haply, he would not glance, to remember me.
He took my hand in one of his, with the other he put back my bonnet;
he looked into my face, his luminous smile went out, his lips
expressed something almost like the wordless language of a mother who
finds a child greatly and unexpectedly changed, broken with illness,
or worn out by want. A check supervened.
"Paul, Paul!" said a woman's hurried voice behind, "Paul, come into
the salon; I have yet a great many things to say to you--conversation
for the whole day--and so has Victor; and Josef is here. Come Paul,
come to your friends."
Madame Beck, brought to the spot by vigilance or an inscrutable
instinct, pressed so near, she almost thrust herself between me and M.
Emanuel.
"Come, Paul!" she reiterated, her eye grazing me with its hard ray
like a steel stylet. She pushed against her kinsman. I thought he
receded; I thought he would go. Pierced deeper than I could endure,
made now to feel what defied suppression, I cried--
"My heart will break!"
What I felt seemed literal heart-break; but the seal of another
fountain yielded under the strain: one breath from M. Paul, the
whisper, "Trust me!" lifted a load, opened an outlet. With many a deep
sob, with thrilling, with icy shiver, with strong trembling, and yet
with relief--I wept.
"Leave her to me; it is a crisis: I will give her a cordial, and it
will pass," said the calm Madame Beck.
To be left to her and her cordial seemed to me something like being
left to the poisoner and her bowl. When M. Paul answered deeply,
harshly, and briefly--"Laissez-moi!" in the grim sound I felt a music
strange, strong, but life-giving.
"Laissez-moi!" he repeated, his nostrils opening, and his facial
muscles all quivering as he spoke.
"But this will never do," said Madame, with sternness. More sternly
rejoined her kinsman--
"Sortez d'ici!"
"I will send for Pere Silas: on the spot I will send for him," she
threatened pertinaciously.
"Femme!" cried the Professor, not now in his deep tones, but in his
highest and most excited key, "Femme! sortez a l'instant!"
He was roused, and I loved him in his wrath with a passion beyond what
I had yet felt.
"What you do is wrong," pursued Madame; "it is an act characteristic
of men of your unreliable, imaginative temperament; a step impulsive,
injudicious, inconsistent--a proceeding vexatious, and not estimable
in the view of persons of steadier and more resolute character."
"You know not what I have of steady and resolute in me," said he, "but
you shall see; the event shall teach you. Modeste," he continued less
fiercely, "be gentle, be pitying, be a woman; look at this poor face,
and relent. You know I am your friend, and the friend of your friends;
in spite of your taunts, you well and deeply know I may be trusted. Of
sacrificing myself I made no difficulty but my heart is pained by what
I see; it _must_ have and give solace. _Leave me!_"
This time, in the "_leave me_" there was an intonation so bitter
and so imperative, I wondered that even Madame Beck herself could for
one moment delay obedience; but she stood firm; she gazed upon him
dauntless; she met his eye, forbidding and fixed as stone. She was
opening her lips to retort; I saw over all M. Paul's face a quick
rising light and fire; I can hardly tell how he managed the movement;
it did not seem violent; it kept the form of courtesy; he gave his
hand; it scarce touched her I thought; she ran, she whirled from the
room; she was gone, and the door shut, in one second.
The flash of passion was all over very soon. He smiled as he told me
to wipe my eyes; he waited quietly till I was calm, dropping from time
to time a stilling, solacing word. Ere long I sat beside him once more
myself--re-assured, not desperate, nor yet desolate; not friendless,
not hopeless, not sick of life, and seeking death.
"It made you very sad then to lose your friend?" said he.
"It kills me to be forgotten, Monsieur," I said. "All these weary days
I have not heard from you one word, and I was crushed with the
possibility, growing to certainty, that you would depart without
saying farewell!"
"Must I tell you what I told Modeste Beck--that you do not know me?
Must I show and teach you my character? You _will_ have proof
that I can be a firm friend? Without clear proof this hand will not
lie still in mine, it will not trust my shoulder as a safe stay? Good.
The proof is ready. I come to justify myself."
"Say anything, teach anything, prove anything, Monsieur; I can listen
now."
"Then, in the first place, you must go out with me a good distance
into the town. I came on purpose to fetch you."
Without questioning his meaning, or sounding his plan, or offering the
semblance of an objection, I re-tied my bonnet: I was ready.
The route he took was by the boulevards: he several times made me sit
down on the seats stationed under the lime-trees; he did not ask if I
was tired, but looked, and drew his own conclusions.
"All these weary days," said he, repeating my words, with a gentle,
kindly mimicry of my voice and foreign accent, not new from his lips,
and of which the playful banter never wounded, not even when coupled,
as it often was, with the assertion, that however I might _write_
his language, I _spoke_ and always should speak it imperfectly
and hesitatingly. "'All these weary days' I have not for one hour
forgotten you. Faithful women err