you going to school?"
"No."
"Where are you going?"
"I have not the least idea--beyond, at least, the port of Boue-
Marine."
She stared, then carelessly ran on:
"I am going to school. Oh, the number of foreign schools I have been
at in my life! And yet I am quite an ignoramus. I know nothing--
nothing in the world--I assure you; except that I play and dance
beautifully,--and French and German of course I know, to speak; but I
can't read or write them very well. Do you know they wanted me to
translate a page of an easy German book into English the other day,
and I couldn't do it. Papa was so mortified: he says it looks as if M.
de Bassompierre--my godpapa, who pays all my school-bills--had thrown
away all his money. And then, in matters of information--in history,
geography, arithmetic, and so on, I am quite a baby; and I write
English so badly--such spelling and grammar, they tell me. Into the
bargain I have quite forgotten my religion; they call me a Protestant,
you know, but really I am not sure whether I am one or not: I don't
well know the difference between Romanism and Protestantism. However,
I don't in the least care for that. I was a Lutheran once at Bonn--
dear Bonn!--charming Bonn!--where there were so many handsome
students. Every nice girl in our school had an admirer; they knew our
hours for walking out, and almost always passed us on the promenade:
'Schoenes Maedchen,' we used to hear them say. I was excessively happy
at Bonn!"
"And where are you now?" I inquired.
"Oh! at--_chose_," said she.
Now, Miss Ginevra Fanshawe (such was this young person's name) only
substituted this word "_chose_" in temporary oblivion of the real
name. It was a habit she had: "_chose_" came in at every turn in
her conversation--the convenient substitute for any missing word in
any language she might chance at the time to be speaking. French girls
often do the like; from them she had caught the custom.
"_Chose_," however, I found in this instance, stood for Villette--the
great capital of the great kingdom of Labassecour.
"Do you like Villette?" I asked.
"Pretty well. The natives, you know, are intensely stupid and vulgar;
but there are some nice English families."
"Are you in a school?"
"Yes."
"A good one?"
"Oh, no! horrid: but I go out every Sunday, and care nothing about the
_maitresses_ or the _professeurs_, or the _eleves_, and send lessons
_au diable_ (one daren't say that in English, you know, but it sounds
quite right in French); and thus I get on charmingly.... You are laughing
at me again?"
"No--I am only smiling at my own thoughts."
"What are they?" (Without waiting for an answer)--"Now, _do_ tell
me where you are going."
"Where Fate may lead me. My business is to earn a living where I can
find it."
"To earn!" (in consternation) "are you poor, then?"
"As poor as Job."
(After a pause)--"Bah! how unpleasant! But _I_ know what it is to
be poor: they are poor enough at home--papa and mamma, and all of
them. Papa is called Captain Fanshawe; he is an officer on half-pay,
but well-descended, and some of our connections are great enough; but
my uncle and godpapa De Bassompierre, who lives in France, is the only
one that helps us: he educates us girls. I have five sisters and three
brothers. By-and-by we are to marry--rather elderly gentlemen, I
suppose, with cash: papa and mamma manage that. My sister Augusta is
married now to a man much older-looking than papa. Augusta is very
beautiful--not in my style--but dark; her husband, Mr. Davies, had the
yellow fever in India, and he is still the colour of a guinea; but
then he is rich, and Augusta has her carriage and establishment, and
we all think she has done perfectly well. Now, this is better than
'earning a living,' as you say. By the way, are you clever?"
"No--not at all."
"You can play, sing, speak three or four languages?"
"By no means."
"Still I think you are clever" (a pause and a yawn).
"Shall you be sea-sick?"
"Shall you?"
"Oh, immensely! as soon as ever we get in sight of the sea: I begin,
indeed, to feel it already. I shall go below; and won't I order about
that fat odious stewardess! Heureusement je sais faire aller mon
monde."
Down she went.
It was not long before the other passengers followed her: throughout
the afternoon I remained on deck alone. When I recall the tranquil,
and even happy mood in which I passed those hours, and remember, at
the same time, the position in which I was placed; its hazardous--some
would have said its hopeless--character; I feel that, as--
Stone walls do not a prison make,
Nor iron bars--a cage,
so peril, loneliness, an uncertain future, are not oppressive evils,
so long as the frame is healthy and the faculties are employed; so
long, especially, as Liberty lends us her wings, and Hope guides us by
her star.
I was not sick till long after we passed Margate, and deep was the
pleasure I drank in with the sea-breeze; divine the delight I drew
from the heaving Channel waves, from the sea-birds on their ridges,
from the white sails on their dark distance, from the quiet yet
beclouded sky, overhanging all. In my reverie, methought I saw the
continent of Europe, like a wide dream-land, far away. Sunshine lay on
it, making the long coast one line of gold; tiniest tracery of
clustered town and snow-gleaming tower, of woods deep massed, of
heights serrated, of smooth pasturage and veiny stream, embossed the
metal-bright prospect. For background, spread a sky, solemn and dark
blue, and--grand with imperial promise, soft with tints of
enchantment--strode from north to south a God-bent bow, an arch of
hope.
Cancel the whole of that, if you please, reader--or rather let it
stand, and draw thence a moral--an alliterative, text-hand copy--
Day-dreams are delusions of the demon.
Becoming excessively sick, I faltered down into the cabin.
Miss Fanshawe's berth chanced to be next mine; and, I am sorry to say,
she tormented me with an unsparing selfishness during the whole time
of our mutual distress. Nothing could exceed her impatience and
fretfulness. The Watsons, who were very sick too, and on whom the
stewardess attended with shameless partiality, were stoics compared
with her. Many a time since have I noticed, in persons of Ginevra
Fanshawe's light, careless temperament, and fair, fragile style of
beauty, an entire incapacity to endure: they seem to sour in
adversity, like small beer