my darling bear
As true, as deep a love?
"O God, watch o'er my foster child!
O guard her gentle head!
When minds are high and tempests wild
Protection round her spread!
"They call again; leave then my breast;
Quit thy true shelter, Jane;
But when deceived, repulsed, opprest,
Come home to me again!"
I read--then dreamily made marks on the margin with my pencil; thinking
all the while of other things; thinking that "Jane" was now at my side;
no child, but a girl of nineteen; and she might be mine, so my heart
affirmed; Poverty's curse was taken off me; Envy and Jealousy were
far away, and unapprized of this our quiet meeting; the frost of the
Master's manner might melt; I felt the thaw coming fast, whether I would
or not; no further need for the eye to practise a hard look, for the
brow to compress its expense into a stern fold: it was now permitted
to suffer the outward revelation of the inward glow--to seek, demand,
elicit an answering ardour. While musing thus, I thought that the grass
on Hermon never drank the fresh dews of sunset more gratefully than my
feelings drank the bliss of this hour.
Frances rose, as if restless; she passed before me to stir the fire,
which did not want stirring; she lifted and put down the little
ornaments on the mantelpiece; her dress waved within a yard of me;
slight, straight, and elegant, she stood erect on the hearth.
There are impulses we can control; but there are others which control
us, because they attain us with a tiger-leap, and are our masters ere
we have seen them. Perhaps, though, such impulses are seldom altogether
bad; perhaps Reason, by a process as brief as quiet, a process that
is finished ere felt, has ascertained the sanity of the deed Instinct
meditates, and feels justified in remaining passive while it is
performed. I know I did not reason, I did not plan or intend, yet,
whereas one moment I was sitting solus on the chair near the table,
the next, I held Frances on my knee, placed there with sharpness and
decision, and retained with exceeding tenacity.
"Monsieur!" cried Frances, and was still: not another word escaped her
lips; sorely confounded she seemed during the lapse of the first few
moments; but the amazement soon subsided; terror did not succeed, nor
fury: after all, she was only a little nearer than she had ever been
before, to one she habitually respected and trusted; embarrassment might
have impelled her to contend, but self-respect checked resistance where
resistance was useless.
"Frances, how much regard have you for me?" was my demand. No answer;
the situation was yet too new and surprising to permit speech. On this
consideration, I compelled myself for some seconds to tolerate her
silence, though impatient of it: presently, I repeated the same
question--probably, not in the calmest of tones; she looked at me; my
face, doubtless, was no model of composure, my eyes no still wells of
tranquillity.
"Do speak," I urged; and a very low, hurried, yet still arch voice
said--
"Monsieur, vous me faites mal; de grace lachez un peu ma main droite."
In truth I became aware that I was holding the said "main droite" in
a somewhat ruthless grasp: I did as desired; and, for the third time,
asked more gently--
"Frances, how much regard have you for me?"
"Mon maitre, j'en ai beaucoup," was the truthful rejoinder.
"Frances, have you enough to give yourself to me as my wife?--to accept
me as your husband?"
I felt the agitation of the heart, I saw "the purple light of love" cast
its glowing reflection on cheeks, temples, neck; I desired to consult
the eye, but sheltering lash and lid forbade.
"Monsieur," said the soft voice at last,--"Monsieur desire savoir si je
consens--si--enfin, si je veux me marier avec lui?"
"Justement."
"Monsieur sera-t-il aussi bon mari qu'il a ete bon maitre?"
"I will try, Frances."
A pause; then with a new, yet still subdued inflexion of the voice--an
inflexion which provoked while it pleased me--accompanied, too, by a
"sourire a la fois fin et timide" in perfect harmony with the tone:--
"C'est a dire, monsieur sera toujours un peu entete exigeant,
volontaire--?"
"Have I been so, Frances?"
"Mais oui; vous le savez bien."
"Have I been nothing else?"
"Mais oui; vons avez ete mon meilleur ami."
"And what, Frances, are you to me?"
"Votre devouee eleve, qui vous aime de tout son coeur."
"Will my pupil consent to pass her life with me? Speak English now,
Frances."
Some moments were taken for reflection; the answer, pronounced slowly,
ran thus:--
"You have always made me happy; I like to hear you speak; I like to
see you; I like to be near you; I believe you are very good, and very
superior; I know you are stern to those who are careless and idle, but
you are kind, very kind to the attentive and industrious, even if they
are not clever. Master, I should be GLAD to live with you always;"
and she made a sort of movement, as if she would have clung to me, but
restraining herself she only added with earnest emphasis--"Master, I
consent to pass my life with you."
"Very well, Frances."
I drew her a little nearer to my heart; I took a first kiss from her
lips, thereby sealing the compact, now framed between us; afterwards she
and I were silent, nor was our silence brief. Frances' thoughts, during
this interval, I know not, nor did I attempt to guess them; I was not
occupied in searching her countenance, nor in otherwise troubling her
composure. The peace I felt, I wished her to feel; my arm, it is true,
still detained her; but with a restraint that was gentle enough, so long
as no opposition tightened it. My gaze was on the red fire; my heart was
measuring its own content; it sounded and sounded, and found the depth
fathomless.
"Monsieur," at last said my quiet companion, as stirless in her
happiness as a mouse in its terror. Even now in speaking she scarcely
lifted her head.
"Well, Frances?" I like unexaggerated intercourse; it is not my way to
overpower with amorous epithets, any more than to worry with selfishly
importunate caresses.
"Monsieur est raisonnable, n'eut-ce pas?"
"Yes; especially when I am requested to be so in English: but why do
you ask me? You see nothing vehement or obtrusive in my manner; am I not
tranquil enough?"
"Ce n'est pas cela--" began Frances.
"English!" I reminded her.
"Well, monsieur, I wished merely to say,