But she bathed my temples and forehead with
some cool and perfumed water, and then she heightened the cushion on
which I reclined, made signs that I was not to speak, and resumed her
post at the foot of the sofa.
She was busy knitting; her eyes thus drawn from me, I could gaze on
her without interruption. I did mightily wonder how she came there, or
what she could have to do among the scenes, or with the days of my
girlhood. Still more I marvelled what those scenes and days could now
have to do with me.
Too weak to scrutinize thoroughly the mystery, I tried to settle it by
saying it was a mistake, a dream, a fever-fit; and yet I knew there
could be no mistake, and that I was not sleeping, and I believed I was
sane. I wished the room had not been so well lighted, that I might not
so clearly have seen the little pictures, the ornaments, the screens,
the worked chair. All these objects, as well as the blue-damask
furniture, were, in fact, precisely the same, in every minutest
detail, with those I so well remembered, and with which I had been so
thoroughly intimate, in the drawing-room of my godmother's house at
Bretton. Methought the apartment only was changed, being of different
proportions and dimensions.
I thought of Bedreddin Hassan, transported in his sleep from Cairo to
the gates of Damascus. Had a Genius stooped his dark wing down the
storm to whose stress I had succumbed, and gathering me from the
church-steps, and "rising high into the air," as the eastern tale
said, had he borne me over land and ocean, and laid me quietly down
beside a hearth of Old England? But no; I knew the fire of that hearth
burned before its Lares no more--it went out long ago, and the
household gods had been carried elsewhere.
The bonne turned again to survey me, and seeing my eyes wide open,
and, I suppose, deeming their expression perturbed and excited, she
put down her knitting. I saw her busied for a moment at a little
stand; she poured out water, and measured drops from a phial: glass in
hand, she approached me. What dark-tinged draught might she now be
offering? what Genii-elixir or Magi-distillation?
It was too late to inquire--I had swallowed it passively, and at once.
A tide of quiet thought now came gently caressing my brain; softer and
softer rose the flow, with tepid undulations smoother than balm. The
pain of weakness left my limbs, my muscles slept. I lost power to
move; but, losing at the same time wish, it was no privation. That
kind bonne placed a screen between me and the lamp; I saw her rise to
do this, but do not remember seeing her resume her place: in the
interval between the two acts, I "fell on sleep."
* * * * *
At waking, lo! all was again changed. The light of high day surrounded
me; not, indeed, a warm, summer light, but the leaden gloom of raw and
blustering autumn. I felt sure now that I was in the pensionnat--sure
by the beating rain on the casement; sure by the "wuther" of wind
amongst trees, denoting a garden outside; sure by the chill, the
whiteness, the solitude, amidst which I lay. I say _whiteness_--
for the dimity curtains, dropped before a French bed, bounded my view.
I lifted them; I looked out. My eye, prepared to take in the range of
a long, large, and whitewashed chamber, blinked baffled, on
encountering the limited area of a small cabinet--a cabinet with
seagreen walls; also, instead of five wide and naked windows, there
was one high lattice, shaded with muslin festoons: instead of two
dozen little stands of painted wood, each holding a basin and an ewer,
there was a toilette-table dressed, like a lady for a ball, in a white
robe over a pink skirt; a polished and large glass crowned, and a
pretty pin-cushion frilled with lace, adorned it. This toilette,
together with a small, low, green and white chintz arm-chair, a
washstand topped with a marble slab, and supplied with utensils of
pale greenware, sufficiently furnished the tiny chamber.
Reader; I felt alarmed! Why? you will ask. What was there in this
simple and somewhat pretty sleeping-closet to startle the most timid?
Merely this--These articles of furniture could not be real, solid arm-
chairs, looking-glasses, and washstands--they must be the ghosts of
such articles; or, if this were denied as too wild an hypothesis--and,
confounded as I was, I _did_ deny it--there remained but to
conclude that I had myself passed into an abnormal state of mind; in
short, that I was very ill and delirious: and even then, mine was the
strangest figment with which delirium had ever harassed a victim.
I knew--I was obliged to know--the green chintz of that little chair;
the little snug chair itself, the carved, shining-black, foliated
frame of that glass; the smooth, milky-green of the china vessels on
the stand; the very stand too, with its top of grey marble, splintered
at one corner;--all these I was compelled to recognise and to hail, as
last night I had, perforce, recognised and hailed the rosewood, the
drapery, the porcelain, of the drawing-room.
Bretton! Bretton! and ten years ago shone reflected in that mirror.
And why did Bretton and my fourteenth year haunt me thus? Why, if they
came at all, did they not return complete? Why hovered before my
distempered vision the mere furniture, while the rooms and the
locality were gone? As to that pincushion made of crimson satin,
ornamented with gold beads and frilled with thread-lace, I had the
same right to know it as to know the screens--I had made it myself.
Rising with a start from the bed, I took the cushion in my hand and
examined it. There was the cipher "L. L. B." formed in gold beds, and
surrounded with an oval wreath embroidered in white silk. These were
the initials of my godmother's name--Lonisa Lucy Bretton.
"Am I in England? Am I at Bretton?" I muttered; and hastily pulling up
the blind with which the lattice was shrouded, I looked out to try and
discover _where_ I was; half-prepared to meet the calm, old,
handsome buildings and clean grey pavement of St. Ann's Street, and to
see at the end the towers of the minster: or, if otherwise, fully
expectant of a town view somewhere, a rue in Villette, if