you now,
I am not quite prepared."
Mechanically obedient, I rose and went. I knew what I was about; my
mind had run over the intent with lightning-speed. To take this step
could not make me more wretched than I was; it might soothe me.
The priest within the confessional never turned his eyes to regard me;
he only quietly inclined his ear to my lips. He might be a good man,
but this duty had become to him a sort of form: he went through it
with the phlegm of custom. I hesitated; of the formula of confession I
was ignorant: instead of commencing, then, with the prelude usual, I
said:--"Mon pere, je suis Protestante."
He directly turned. He was not a native priest: of that class, the
cast of physiognomy is, almost invariably, grovelling: I saw by his
profile and brow he was a Frenchman; though grey and advanced in
years, he did not, I think, lack feeling or intelligence. He inquired,
not unkindly, why, being a Protestant, I came to him?
I said I was perishing for a word of advice or an accent of comfort. I
had been living for some weeks quite alone; I had been ill; I had a
pressure of affliction on my mind of which it would hardly any longer
endure the weight.
"Was it a sin, a crime?" he inquired, somewhat startled. I reassured
him on this point, and, as well as I could, I showed him the mere
outline of my experience.
He looked thoughtful, surprised, puzzled. "You take me unawares," said
he. "I have not had such a case as yours before: ordinarily we know
our routine, and are prepared; but this makes a great break in the
common course of confession. I am hardly furnished with counsel
fitting the circumstances."
Of course, I had not expected he would be; but the mere relief of
communication in an ear which was human and sentient, yet consecrated
--the mere pouring out of some portion of long accumulating, long pent-up
pain into a vessel whence it could not be again diffused--had done me
good. I was already solaced.
"Must I go, father?" I asked of him as he sat silent.
"My daughter," he said kindly--and I am sure he was a kind man: he had
a compassionate eye--"for the present you had better go: but I assure
you your words have struck me. Confession, like other things, is apt
to become formal and trivial with habit. You have come and poured your
heart out; a thing seldom done. I would fain think your case over, and
take it with me to my oratory. Were you of our faith I should know
what to say--a mind so tossed can find repose but in the bosom of
retreat, and the punctual practice of piety. The world, it is well
known, has no satisfaction for that class of natures. Holy men have
bidden penitents like you to hasten their path upward by penance,
self-denial, and difficult good works. Tears are given them here for
meat and drink--bread of affliction and waters of affliction--their
recompence comes hereafter. It is my own conviction that these
impressions under which you are smarting are messengers from God to
bring you back to the true Church. You were made for our faith: depend
upon it our faith alone could heal and help you--Protestantism is
altogether too dry, cold, prosaic for you. The further I look into
this matter, the more plainly I see it is entirely out of the common
order of things. On no account would I lose sight of you. Go, my
daughter, for the present; but return to me again."
I rose and thanked him. I was withdrawing when he signed me to return.
"You must not come to this church," said he: "I see you are ill, and
this church is too cold; you must come to my house: I live----" (and
he gave me his address). "Be there to-morrow morning at ten."
In reply to this appointment, I only bowed; and pulling down my veil,
and gathering round me my cloak, I glided away.
Did I, do you suppose, reader, contemplate venturing again within that
worthy priest's reach? As soon should I have thought of walking into a
Babylonish furnace. That priest had arms which could influence me: he
was naturally kind, with a sentimental French kindness, to whose
softness I knew myself not wholly impervious. Without respecting some
sorts of affection, there was hardly any sort having a fibre of root
in reality, which I could rely on my force wholly to withstand. Had I
gone to him, he would have shown me all that was tender, and
comforting, and gentle, in the honest Popish superstition. Then he
would have tried to kindle, blow and stir up in me the zeal of good
works. I know not how it would all have ended. We all think ourselves
strong in some points; we all know ourselves weak in many; the
probabilities are that had I visited Numero 10, Rue des Mages, at the
hour and day appointed, I might just now, instead of writing this
heretic narrative, be counting my beads in the cell of a certain
Carmelite convent on the Boulevard of Crecy, in Villette. There was
something of Fenelon about that benign old priest; and whatever most
of his brethren may be, and whatever I may think of his Church and
creed (and I like neither), of himself I must ever retain a grateful
recollection. He was kind when I needed kindness; he did me good. May
Heaven bless him!
Twilight had passed into night, and the lamps were lit in the streets
ere I issued from that sombre church. To turn back was now become
possible to me; the wild longing to breathe this October wind on the
little hill far without the city walls had ceased to be an imperative
impulse, and was softened into a wish with which Reason could cope:
she put it down, and I turned, as I thought, to the Rue Fossette. But
I had become involved in a part of the city with which I was not
familiar; it was the old part, and full of narrow streets of
picturesque, ancient, and mouldering houses. I was much too weak to be
very collected, and I was still too careless of my own welfare and
safety to be cautious; I grew embarrassed; I got immeshed in a network
of turns unknown. I was lost and had no resolution