me in a blanket and place me in the little chintz chair; but,
declining these attentions, I proceeded to dress myself:
The business was just achieved, and I was sitting down to take breath,
when Mrs. Bretton once more appeared.
"Dressed!" she exclaimed, smiling with that smile I so well knew--a
pleasant smile, though not soft. "You are quite better then? Quite
strong--eh?"
She spoke to me so much as of old she used to speak that I almost
fancied she was beginning to know me. There was the same sort of
patronage in her voice and manner that, as a girl, I had always
experienced from her--a patronage I yielded to and even liked; it was
not founded on conventional grounds of superior wealth or station (in
the last particular there had never been any inequality; her degree
was mine); but on natural reasons of physical advantage: it was the
shelter the tree gives the herb. I put a request without further
ceremony.
"Do let me go down-stairs, madam; I am so cold and dull here."
"I desire nothing better, if you are strong enough to bear the
change," was her reply. "Come then; here is an arm." And she offered
me hers: I took it, and we descended one flight of carpeted steps to a
landing where a tall door, standing open, gave admission into the
blue-damask room. How pleasant it was in its air of perfect domestic
comfort! How warm in its amber lamp-light and vermilion fire-flush! To
render the picture perfect, tea stood ready on the table--an English
tea, whereof the whole shining service glanced at me familiarly; from
the solid silver urn, of antique pattern, and the massive pot of the
same metal, to the thin porcelain cups, dark with purple and gilding.
I knew the very seed-cake of peculiar form, baked in a peculiar mould,
which always had a place on the tea-table at Bretton. Graham liked it,
and there it was as of yore--set before Graham's plate with the silver
knife and fork beside it. Graham was then expected to tea: Graham was
now, perhaps, in the house; ere many minutes I might see him.
"Sit down--sit down," said my conductress, as my step faltered a
little in passing to the hearth. She seated me on the sofa, but I soon
passed behind it, saying the fire was too hot; in its shade I found
another seat which suited me better. Mrs. Bretton was never wont to
make a fuss about any person or anything; without remonstrance she
suffered me to have my own way. She made the tea, and she took up the
newspaper. I liked to watch every action of my godmother; all her
movements were so young: she must have been now above fifty, yet
neither her sinews nor her spirit seemed yet touched by the rust of
age. Though portly, she was alert, and though serene, she was at times
impetuous--good health and an excellent temperament kept her green as
in her spring.
While she read, I perceived she listened--listened for her son. She
was not the woman ever to confess herself uneasy, but there was yet no
lull in the weather, and if Graham were out in that hoarse wind--
roaring still unsatisfied--I well knew his mother's heart would be out
with him.
"Ten minutes behind his time," said she, looking at her watch; then,
in another minute, a lifting of her eyes from the page, and a slight
inclination of her head towards the door, denoted that she heard some
sound. Presently her brow cleared; and then even my ear, less
practised, caught the iron clash of a gate swung to, steps on gravel,
lastly the door-bell. He was come. His mother filled the teapot from
the urn, she drew nearer the hearth the stuffed and cushioned blue
chair--her own chair by right, but I saw there was one who might with
impunity usurp it. And when that _one_ came up the stairs--which
he soon did, after, I suppose, some such attention to the toilet as
the wild and wet night rendered necessary, and strode straight in--
"Is it you, Graham?" said his mother, hiding a glad smile and speaking
curtly.
"Who else should it be, mamma?" demanded the Unpunctual, possessing
himself irreverently of the abdicated throne.
"Don't you deserve cold tea, for being late?"
"I shall not get my deserts, for the urn sings cheerily."
"Wheel yourself to the table, lazy boy: no seat will serve you but
mine; if you had one spark of a sense of propriety, you would always
leave that chair for the Old Lady."
"So I should; only the dear Old Lady persists in leaving it for me.
How is your patient, mamma?"
"Will she come forward and speak for herself?" said Mrs. Bretton,
turning to my corner; and at this invitation, forward I came. Graham
courteously rose up to greet me. He stood tall on the hearth, a figure
justifying his mother's unconcealed pride.
"So you are come down," said he; "you must be better then--much
better. I scarcely expected we should meet thus, or here. I was
alarmed last night, and if I had not been forced to hurry away to a
dying patient, I certainly would not have left you; but my mother
herself is something of a doctress, and Martha an excellent nurse. I
saw the case was a fainting-fit, not necessarily dangerous. What
brought it on, I have yet to learn, and all particulars; meantime, I
trust you really do feel better?"
"Much better," I said calmly. "Much better, I thank you, Dr. John."
For, reader, this tall young man--this darling son--this host of mine
--this Graham Bretton, _was_ Dr. John: he, and no other; and, what
is more, I ascertained this identity scarcely with surprise. What is
more, when I heard Graham's step on the stairs, I knew what manner of
figure would enter, and for whose aspect to prepare my eyes. The
discovery was not of to-day, its dawn had penetrated my perceptions
long since. Of course I remembered young Bretton well; and though ten
years (from sixteen to twenty-six) may greatly change the boy as they
mature him to the man, yet they could bring no such utter difference
as would suffice wholly to blind my eyes, or baffle my memory. Dr.
John Graham Bretton retained still an affinity to the youth of
sixteen: he had his eyes; he had some of his features; to wit, all the
excellently-moulded lower half of the face; I found him out soon.