these demonstrations were borne passively:
sometimes even a sort of complacent wonder at her earnest partiality
would smile not unkindly in his eyes. Once he said:--"You like me
almost as well as if you were my little sister, Polly."
"Oh! I _do_ like you," said she; "I _do_ like you very
much."
I was not long allowed the amusement of this study of character. She
had scarcely been at Bretton two months, when a letter came from Mr.
Home, signifying that he was now settled amongst his maternal kinsfolk
on the Continent; that, as England was become wholly distasteful to
him, he had no thoughts of returning hither, perhaps, for years; and
that he wished his little girl to join him immediately.
"I wonder how she will take this news?" said Mrs. Bretton, when she
had read the letter. _I_ wondered, too, and I took upon myself to
communicate it.
Repairing to the drawing-room--in which calm and decorated apartment
she was fond of being alone, and where she could be implicitly
trusted, for she fingered nothing, or rather soiled nothing she
fingered--I found her seated, like a little Odalisque, on a couch,
half shaded by the drooping draperies of the window near. She seemed
happy; all her appliances for occupation were about her; the white
wood workbox, a shred or two of muslin, an end or two of ribbon
collected for conversion into doll-millinery. The doll, duly night-
capped and night-gowned, lay in its cradle; she was rocking it to
sleep, with an air of the most perfect faith in its possession of
sentient and somnolent faculties; her eyes, at the same time, being
engaged with a picture-book, which lay open on her lap.
"Miss Snowe," said she in a whisper, "this is a wonderful book.
Candace" (the doll, christened by Graham; for, indeed, its begrimed
complexion gave it much of an Ethiopian aspect)--"Candace is asleep
now, and I may tell you about it; only we must both speak low, lest
she should waken. This book was given me by Graham; it tells about
distant countries, a long, long way from England, which no traveller
can reach without sailing thousands of miles over the sea. Wild men
live in these countries, Miss Snowe, who wear clothes different from
ours: indeed, some of them wear scarcely any clothes, for the sake of
being cool, you know; for they have very hot weather. Here is a
picture of thousands gathered in a desolate place--a plain, spread
with sand--round a man in black,--a good, _good_ Englishman--a
missionary, who is preaching to them under a palm-tree." (She showed
a little coloured cut to that effect.) "And here are pictures" (she
went on) "more stranger" (grammar was occasionally forgotten) "than
that. There is the wonderful Great Wall of China; here is a Chinese
lady, with a foot littler than mine. There is a wild horse of Tartary;
and here, most strange of all--is a land of ice and snow, without
green fields, woods, or gardens. In this land, they found some mammoth
bones: there are no mammoths now. You don't know what it was; but I
can tell you, because Graham told me. A mighty, goblin creature, as
high as this room, and as long as the hall; but not a fierce, flesh-
eating thing, Graham thinks. He believes, if I met one in a forest, it
would not kill me, unless I came quite in its way; when it would
trample me down amongst the bushes, as I might tread on a grasshopper
in a hayfield without knowing it."
Thus she rambled on.
"Polly," I interrupted, "should you like to travel?"
"Not just yet," was the prudent answer; "but perhaps in twenty years,
when I am grown a woman, as tall as Mrs. Bretton, I may travel with
Graham. We intend going to Switzerland, and climbing Mount Blanck; and
some day we shall sail over to South America, and walk to the top of
Kim-kim-borazo."
"But how would you like to travel now, if your papa was with you?"
Her reply--not given till after a pause--evinced one of those
unexpected turns of temper peculiar to her.
"Where is the good of talking in that silly way?" said she. "Why do
you mention papa? What is papa to you? I was just beginning to be
happy, and not think about him so much; and there it will be all to do
over again!"
Her lip trembled. I hastened to disclose the fact of a letter having
been received, and to mention the directions given that she and
Harriet should immediately rejoin this dear papa. "Now, Polly, are you
not glad?" I added.
She made no answer. She dropped her book and ceased to rock her doll;
she gazed at me with gravity and earnestness.
"Shall not you like to go to papa?"
"Of course," she said at last in that trenchant manner she usually
employed in speaking to me; and which was quite different from that
she used with Mrs. Bretton, and different again from the one dedicated
to Graham. I wished to ascertain more of what she thought but no: she
would converse no more. Hastening to Mrs. Bretton, she questioned her,
and received the confirmation of my news. The weight and importance of
these tidings kept her perfectly serious the whole day. In the
evening, at the moment Graham's entrance was heard below, I found her
at my side. She began to arrange a locket-ribbon about my neck, she
displaced and replaced the comb in my hair; while thus busied, Graham
entered.
"Tell him by-and-by," she whispered; "tell him I am going."
In the course of tea-time I made the desired communication. Graham, it
chanced, was at that time greatly preoccupied about some school-prize,
for which he was competing. The news had to be told twice before it
took proper hold of his attention, and even then he dwelt on it but
momently.
"Polly going? What a pity! Dear little Mousie, I shall be sorry to
lose her: she must come to us again, mamma."
And hastily swallowing his tea, he took a candle and a small table to
himself and his books, and was soon buried in study.
"Little Mousie" crept to his side, and lay down on the carpet at his
feet, her face to the floor; mute and motionless she kept that post
and position till bed-time. Once I saw Graham--wholly unconscious of
her proximity--push her with his restless foot. She receded an inch or
two. A minute after one little hand stole out from beneath her face,
to which