the carriage-
door closed. Her invectives against Dr. Bretton had something venomous
in them. Having found herself impotent either to charm or sting him,
hatred was her only resource; and this hatred she expressed in terms
so unmeasured and proportion so monstrous, that, after listening for a
while with assumed stoicism, my outraged sense of justice at last and
suddenly caught fire. An explosion ensued: for I could be passionate,
too; especially with my present fair but faulty associate, who never
failed to stir the worst dregs of me. It was well that the carriage-
wheels made a tremendous rattle over the flinty Choseville pavement,
for I can assure the reader there was neither dead silence nor calm
discussion within the vehicle. Half in earnest, half in seeming, I
made it my business to storm down Ginevra. She had set out rampant
from the Rue Crecy; it was necessary to tame her before we reached the
Rue Fossette: to this end it was indispensable to show up her sterling
value and high deserts; and this must be done in language of which the
fidelity and homeliness might challenge comparison with the
compliments of a John Knox to a Mary Stuart. This was the right
discipline for Ginevra; it suited her. I am quite sure she went to bed
that night all the better and more settled in mind and mood, and slept
all the more sweetly for having undergone a sound moral drubbing.
CHAPTER XXVIII.
THE WATCHGUARD.
M. Paul Emanuel owned an acute sensitiveness to the annoyance of
interruption, from whatsoever cause occurring, during his lessons: to
pass through the classe under such circumstances was considered by the
teachers and pupils of the school, individually and collectively, to
be as much as a woman's or girl's life was worth.
Madame Beck herself, if forced to the enterprise, would "skurry"
through, retrenching her skirts, and carefully coasting the formidable
estrade, like a ship dreading breakers. As to Rosine, the portress--on
whom, every half-hour, devolved the fearful duty of fetching pupils
out of the very heart of one or other of the divisions to take their
music-lessons in the oratory, the great or little saloon, the salle-a-
manger, or some other piano-station--she would, upon her second or
third attempt, frequently become almost tongue-tied from excess of
consternation--a sentiment inspired by the unspeakable looks levelled
at her through a pair of dart-dealing spectacles.
One morning I was sitting in the carre, at work upon a piece of
embroidery which one of the pupils had commenced but delayed to
finish, and while my fingers wrought at the frame, my ears regaled
themselves with listening to the crescendos and cadences of a voice
haranguing in the neighbouring classe, in tones that waxed momentarily
more unquiet, more ominously varied. There was a good strong
partition-wall between me and the gathering storm, as well as a facile
means of flight through the glass-door to the court, in case it swept
this way; so I am afraid I derived more amusement than alarm from
these thickening symptoms. Poor Rosine was not safe: four times that
blessed morning had she made the passage of peril; and now, for the
fifth time, it became her dangerous duty to snatch, as it were, a
brand from the burning--a pupil from under M. Paul's nose.
"Mon Dieu! Mon Dieu!" cried she. "Que vais-je devenir? Monsieur va me
tuer, je suis sure; car il est d'une colere!"
Nerved by the courage of desperation, she opened the door.
"Mademoiselle La Malle au piano!" was her cry.
Ere she could make good her retreat, or quite close the door, this
voice uttered itself:--
"Des ce moment!--la classe est defendue. La premiere qui ouvrira cette
porte, ou passera par cette division, sera pendue--fut-ce Madame Beck
elle-meme!"
Ten minutes had not succeeded the promulgation of this decree when
Rosine's French pantoufles were again heard shuffling along the
corridor.
"Mademoiselle," said she, "I would not for a five-franc piece go into
that classe again just now: Monsieur's lunettes are really terrible;
and here is a commissionaire come with a message from the Athenee. I
have told Madame Beck I dare not deliver it, and she says I am to
charge you with it."
"Me? No, that is rather too bad! It is not in my line of duty. Come,
come, Rosine! bear your own burden. Be brave--charge once more!"
"I, Mademoiselle?--impossible! Five times I have crossed him this day.
Madame must really hire a gendarme for this service. Ouf! Je n'en puis
plus!"
"Bah! you are only a coward. What is the message?"
"Precisely of the kind with which Monsieur least likes to be pestered:
an urgent summons to go directly to the Athenee, as there is an
official visitor--inspector--I know not what--arrived, and Monsieur
_must_ meet him: you know how he hates a _must_."
Yes, I knew well enough. The restive little man detested spur or curb:
against whatever was urgent or obligatory, he was sure to revolt.
However, I accepted the responsibility--not, certainly, without fear,
but fear blent with other sentiments, curiosity, amongst them. I
opened the door, I entered, I closed it behind me as quickly and
quietly as a rather unsteady hand would permit; for to be slow or
bustling, to rattle a latch, or leave a door gaping wide, were
aggravations of crime often more disastrous in result than the main
crime itself. There I stood then, and there he sat; his humour was
visibly bad--almost at its worst; he had been giving a lesson in
arithmetic--for he gave lessons on any and every subject that struck
his fancy--and arithmetic being a dry subject, invariably disagreed
with him: not a pupil but trembled when he spoke of figures. He sat,
bent above his desk: to look up at the sound of an entrance, at the
occurrence of a direct breach of his will and law, was an effort he
could not for the moment bring himself to make. It was quite as well:
I thus gained time to walk up the long classe; and it suited my
idiosyncracy far better to encounter the near burst of anger like his,
than to bear its menace at a distance.
At his estrade I paused, just in front; of course I was not worthy of
immediate attention: he proceeded with his lesson. Disdain would not
do: he must hear and he must answer my message.
Not being quite tall enough to lift my head over his desk, elevated
upon the estrade, and thus suffering eclipse in my present position, I
ventured to peep round, with the design, at