solids, they proposed a "petit verre." I declined. Not
so Mesdames Pelet and Reuter; each mixed herself what I thought rather
a stiff tumbler of punch, and placing it on a stand near the stove, they
drew up their chairs to that convenience, and invited me to do the same.
I obeyed; and being seated fairly between them, I was thus addressed
first by Madame Pelet, then by Madame Reuter.
"We will now speak of business," said Madame Pelet, and she went on to
make an elaborate speech, which, being interpreted, was to the effect
that she had asked for the pleasure of my company that evening in
order to give her friend Madame Reuter an opportunity of broaching an
important proposal, which might turn out greatly to my advantage.
"Pourvu que vous soyez sage," said Madame Reuter, "et a vrai dire,
vous en avez bien l'air. Take one drop of the punch" (or ponche, as she
pronounced it); "it is an agreeable and wholesome beverage after a full
meal."
I bowed, but again declined it. She went on:
"I feel," said she, after a solemn sip--"I feel profoundly the
importance of the commission with which my dear daughter has entrusted
me, for you are aware, Monsieur, that it is my daughter who directs the
establishment in the next house?"
"Ah! I thought it was yourself, madame." Though, indeed, at that moment
I recollected that it was called Mademoiselle, not Madame Reuter's
pensionnat.
"I! Oh, no! I manage the house and look after the servants, as my friend
Madame Pelet does for Monsieur her son--nothing more. Ah! you thought I
gave lessons in class--did you?"
And she laughed loud and long, as though the idea tickled her fancy
amazingly.
"Madame is in the wrong to laugh," I observed; "if she does not give
lessons, I am sure it is not because she cannot;" and I whipped out a
white pocket-handkerchief and wafted it, with a French grace, past my
nose, bowing at the name time.
"Quel charmant jeune homme!" murmured Madame Pelet in a low voice.
Madame Reuter, being less sentimental, as she was Flamand and not
French, only laughed again.
"You are a dangerous person, I fear," said she; "if you can forge
compliments at that rate, Zoraide will positively be afraid of you; but
if you are good, I will keep your secret, and not tell her how well you
can flatter. Now, listen what sort of a proposal she makes to you. She
has heard that you are an excellent professor, and as she wishes to get
the very beet masters for her school (car Zoraide fait tout comme une
reine, c'est une veritable maitresse-femme), she has commissioned me to
step over this afternoon, and sound Madame Pelet as to the possibility
of engaging you. Zoraide is a wary general; she never advances without
first examining well her ground I don't think she would be pleased if
she knew I had already disclosed her intentions to you; she did not
order me to go so far, but I thought there would be no harm in letting
you into the secret, and Madame Pelet was of the same opinion. Take
care, however, you don't betray either of us to Zoraide--to my
daughter, I mean; she is so discreet and circumspect herself, she cannot
understand that one should find a pleasure in gossiping a little--"
"C'est absolument comme mon fils!" cried Madame Pelet.
"All the world is so changed since our girlhood!" rejoined the other:
"young people have such old heads now. But to return, Monsieur. Madame
Pelet will mention the subject of your giving lessons in my daughter's
establishment to her son, and he will speak to you; and then to-morrow,
you will step over to our house, and ask to see my daughter, and you
will introduce the subject as if the first intimation of it had reached
you from M. Pelet himself, and be sure you never mention my name, for I
would not displease Zoraide on any account.
"Bien! bien!" interrupted I--for all this chatter and circumlocution
began to bore me very much; "I will consult M. Pelet, and the thing
shall be settled as you desire. Good evening, mesdames--I am infinitely
obliged to you."
"Comment! vous vous en allez deja?" exclaimed Madame Pelet.
"Prenez encore quelquechose, monsieur; une pomme cuite, des biscuits,
encore une tasse de cafe?"
"Merci, merci, madame--au revoir." And I backed at last out of the
apartment.
Having regained my own room, I set myself to turn over in my mind
the incident of the evening. It seemed a queer affair altogether, and
queerly managed; the two old women had made quite a little intricate
mess of it; still I found that the uppermost feeling in my mind on the
subject was one of satisfaction. In the first place it would be a change
to give lessons in another seminary, and then to teach young ladies
would be an occupation so interesting--to be admitted at all into a
ladies' boarding-school would be an incident so new in my life. Besides,
thought I, as I glanced at the boarded window, "I shall now at last see
the mysterious garden: I shall gaze both on the angels and their Eden."
CHAPTER IX.
M. PELET could not of course object to the proposal made by Mdlle.
Reuter; permission to accept such additional employment, should it
offer, having formed an article of the terms on which he had engaged me.
It was, therefore, arranged in the course of next day that I should
be at liberty to give lessons in Mdlle. Reuter's establishment four
afternoons in every week.
When evening came I prepared to step over in order to seek a conference
with Mademoiselle herself on the subject; I had not had time to pay the
visit before, having been all day closely occupied in class. I remember
very well that before quitting my chamber, I held a brief debate with
myself as to whether I should change my ordinary attire for something
smarter. At last I concluded it would be a waste of labour. "Doubtless,"
thought I, "she is some stiff old maid; for though the daughter of
Madame Reuter, she may well number upwards of forty winters; besides, if
it were otherwise, if she be both young and pretty, I am not handsome,
and no dressing can make me so, therefore I'll go as I am." And off
I started, cursorily glancing sideways as I passed the toilet-table,
surmounted by a looking-glass: a thin irregular face I saw, with sunk,
dark