sex, pursuits, &c., they somehow found a great deal to
say to each other. As to Paulina, I observed that her little character
never properly came out, except with young Bretton. As she got
settled, and accustomed to the house, she proved tractable enough with
Mrs. Bretton; but she would sit on a stool at that lady's feet all day
long, learning her task, or sewing, or drawing figures with a pencil
on a slate, and never kindling once to originality, or showing a
single gleam of the peculiarities of her nature. I ceased to watch her
under such circumstances: she was not interesting. But the moment
Graham's knock sounded of an evening, a change occurred; she was
instantly at the head of the staircase. Usually her welcome was a
reprimand or a threat.
"You have not wiped your shoes properly on the mat. I shall tell your
mamma."
"Little busybody! Are you there?"
"Yes--and you can't reach me: I am higher up than you" (peeping
between the rails of the banister; she could not look over them).
"Polly!"
"My dear boy!" (such was one of her terms for him, adopted in
imitation of his mother.)
"I am fit to faint with fatigue," declared Graham, leaning against the
passage-wall in seeming exhaustion. "Dr. Digby" (the headmaster) "has
quite knocked me up with overwork. Just come down and help me to carry
up my books."
"Ah! you're cunning!"
"Not at all, Polly--it is positive fact. I'm as weak as a rush. Come
down."
"Your eyes are quiet like the cat's, but you'll spring."
"Spring? Nothing of the kind: it isn't in me. Come down."
"Perhaps I may--if you'll promise not to touch--not to snatch me up,
and not to whirl me round."
"I? I couldn't do it!" (sinking into a chair.)
"Then put the books down on the first step, and go three yards off"
This being done, she descended warily, and not taking her eyes from
the feeble Graham. Of course her approach always galvanized him to new
and spasmodic life: the game of romps was sure to be exacted.
Sometimes she would be angry; sometimes the matter was allowed to pass
smoothly, and we could hear her say as she led him up-stairs: "Now, my
dear boy, come and take your tea--I am sure you must want something."
It was sufficiently comical to observe her as she sat beside Graham,
while he took that meal. In his absence she was a still personage, but
with him the most officious, fidgety little body possible. I often
wished she would mind herself and be tranquil; but no--herself was
forgotten in him: he could not be sufficiently well waited on, nor
carefully enough looked after; he was more than the Grand Turk in her
estimation. She would gradually assemble the various plates before
him, and, when one would suppose all he could possibly desire was
within his reach, she would find out something else: "Ma'am," she
would whisper to Mrs. Bretton,--"perhaps your son would like a little
cake--sweet cake, you know--there is some in there" (pointing to the
sideboard cupboard). Mrs. Bretton, as a rule, disapproved of sweet
cake at tea, but still the request was urged,--"One little piece--only
for him--as he goes to school: girls--such as me and Miss Snowe--don't
need treats, but _he_ would like it."
Graham did like it very well, and almost always got it. To do him
justice, he would have shared his prize with her to whom he owed it;
but that was never allowed: to insist, was to ruffle her for the
evening. To stand by his knee, and monopolize his talk and notice, was
the reward she wanted--not a share of the cake.
With curious readiness did she adapt herself to such themes as
interested him. One would have thought the child had no mind or life
of her own, but must necessarily live, move, and have her being in
another: now that her father was taken from her, she nestled to
Graham, and seemed to feel by his feelings: to exist in his existence.
She learned the names of all his schoolfellows in a trice: she got by
heart their characters as given from his lips: a single description of
an individual seemed to suffice. She never forgot, or confused
identities: she would talk with him the whole evening about people she
had never seen, and appear completely to realise their aspect,
manners, and dispositions. Some she learned to mimic: an under-master,
who was an aversion of young Bretton's, had, it seems, some
peculiarities, which she caught up in a moment from Graham's
representation, and rehearsed for his amusement; this, however, Mrs.
Bretton disapproved and forbade.
The pair seldom quarrelled; yet once a rupture occurred, in which her
feelings received a severe shock.
One day Graham, on the occasion of his birthday, had some friends--
lads of his own age--to dine with him. Paulina took much interest in
the coming of these friends; she had frequently heard of them; they
were amongst those of whom Graham oftenest spoke. After dinner, the
young gentlemen were left by themselves in the dining-room, where they
soon became very merry and made a good deal of noise. Chancing to pass
through the hall, I found Paulina sitting alone on the lowest step of
the staircase, her eyes fixed on the glossy panels of the dining-room
door, where the reflection of the hall-lamp was shining; her little
brow knit in anxious, meditation.
"What are you thinking about, Polly?"
"Nothing particular; only I wish that door was clear glass--that I
might see through it. The boys seem very cheerful, and I want to go to
them: I want to be with Graham, and watch his friends."
"What hinders you from going?"
"I feel afraid: but may I try, do you think? May I knock at the door,
and ask to be let in?"
I thought perhaps they might not object to have her as a playmate, and
therefore encouraged the attempt.
She knocked--too faintly at first to be heard, but on a second essay
the door unclosed; Graham's head appeared; he looked in high spirits,
but impatient.
"What do you want, you little monkey?"
"To come to you."
"Do you indeed? As if I would be troubled with you! Away to mamma and
Mistress Snowe, and tell them to put you to bed." The auburn head and
bright flushed face vanished,--the door shut peremptorily. She was
stunned.
"Why does he speak so? He never spoke so before," she said in
consternation. "What have I done?"
"Nothing, Polly; but Graham is busy with his school-friends."
"And he