sied bien!" I once overheard her say to her mother:
"il est beau comme Apollon quand il sourit de son air hautain."
And the jolly old dame laughed, and said she thought her daughter was
bewitched, for I had no point of a handsome man about me, except being
straight and without deformity. "Pour moi," she continued, "il me fait
tout l'effet d'un chat-huant, avec ses besicles."
Worthy old girl! I could have gone and kissed her had she not been a
little too old, too fat, and too red-faced; her sensible, truthful
words seemed so wholesome, contrasted with the morbid illusions of her
daughter.
When Pelet awoke on the morning after his frenzy fit, he retained no
recollection of what had happened the previous night, and his mother
fortunately had the discretion to refrain from informing him that I had
been a witness of his degradation. He did not again have recourse to
wine for curing his griefs, but even in his sober mood he soon showed
that the iron of jealousy had entered into his soul. A thorough
Frenchman, the national characteristic of ferocity had not been omitted
by nature in compounding the ingredients of his character; it had
appeared first in his access of drunken wrath, when some of his
demonstrations of hatred to my person were of a truly fiendish
character, and now it was more covertly betrayed by momentary
contractions of the features, and flashes of fierceness in his light
blue eyes, when their glance chanced to encounter mine. He absolutely
avoided speaking to me; I was now spared even the falsehood of his
politeness. In this state of our mutual relations, my soul rebelled
sometimes almost ungovernably, against living in the house and
discharging the service of such a man; but who is free from the
constraint of circumstances? At that time, I was not: I used to rise
each morning eager to shake off his yoke, and go out with my portmanteau
under my arm, if a beggar, at least a freeman; and in the evening, when
I came back from the pensionnat de demoiselles, a certain pleasant voice
in my ear; a certain face, so intelligent, yet so docile, so reflective,
yet so soft, in my eyes; a certain cast of character, at once proud
and pliant, sensitive and sagacious, serious and ardent, in my head; a
certain tone of feeling, fervid and modest, refined and practical, pure
and powerful, delighting and troubling my memory--visions of new ties I
longed to contract, of new duties I longed to undertake, had taken the
rover and the rebel out of me, and had shown endurance of my hated lot
in the light of a Spartan virtue.
But Pelet's fury subsided; a fortnight sufficed for its rise, progress,
and extinction: in that space of time the dismissal of the obnoxious
teacher had been effected in the neighbouring house, and in the same
interval I had declared my resolution to follow and find out my pupil,
and upon my application for her address being refused, I had summarily
resigned my own post. This last act seemed at once to restore Mdlle.
Reuter to her senses; her sagacity, her judgment, so long misled by a
fascinating delusion, struck again into the right track the moment
that delusion vanished. By the right track, I do not mean the steep and
difficult path of principle--in that path she never trod; but the plain
highway of common sense, from which she had of late widely diverged.
When there she carefully sought, and having found, industriously pursued
the trail of her old suitor, M. Pelet. She soon overtook him. What arts
she employed to soothe and blind him I know not, but she succeeded both
in allaying his wrath, and hoodwinking his discernment, as was soon
proved by the alteration in his mien and manner; she must have managed
to convince him that I neither was, nor ever had been, a rival of his,
for the fortnight of fury against me terminated in a fit of exceeding
graciousness and amenity, not unmixed with a dash of exulting
self-complacency, more ludicrous than irritating. Pelet's bachelor's
life had been passed in proper French style with due disregard to moral
restraint, and I thought his married life promised to be very French
also. He often boasted to me what a terror he had been to certain
husbands of his acquaintance; I perceived it would not now be difficult
to pay him back in his own coin.
The crisis drew on. No sooner had the holidays commenced than note of
preparation for some momentous event sounded all through the premises
of Pelet: painters, polishers, and upholsterers were immediately set
to work, and there was talk of "la chambre de Madame," "le salon de
Madame." Not deeming it probable that the old duenna at present graced
with that title in our house, had inspired her son with such enthusiasm
of filial piety, as to induce him to fit up apartments expressly for her
use, I concluded, in common with the cook, the two housemaids, and the
kitchen-scullion, that a new and more juvenile Madame was destined to be
the tenant of these gay chambers.
Presently official announcement of the coming event was put forth. In
another week's time M. Francois Pelet, directeur, and Mdlle. Zoraide
Reuter, directrice, were to be joined together in the bands of
matrimony. Monsieur, in person, heralded the fact to me; terminating
his communication by an obliging expression of his desire that I should
continue, as heretofore, his ablest assistant and most trusted friend;
and a proposition to raise my salary by an additional two hundred francs
per annum. I thanked him, gave no conclusive answer at the time, and,
when he had left me, threw off my blouse, put on my coat, and set out
on a long walk outside the Porte de Flandre, in order, as I thought, to
cool my blood, calm my nerves, and shake my disarranged ideas into some
order. In fact, I had just received what was virtually my dismissal.
I could not conceal, I did not desire to conceal from myself the
conviction that, being now certain that Mdlle. Reuter was destined to
become Madame Pelet it would not do for me to remain a dependent dweller
in the house which was soon to be hers. Her present demeanour towards
me was deficient neither in dignity nor propriety; but I knew her former
feeling was unchanged. Decorum now repressed, and Policy masked it, but
Opportunity would be