young things with a due degree of deference
for her authority, and should that difficulty be increased by new
discoveries of her incapacity, she might find her position in my
establishment too painful to be retained; a circumstance I should much
regret for her sake, as she can ill afford to lose the profits of her
occupation here."
Mdlle. Reuter possessed marvellous tact; but tact the most exclusive,
unsupported by sincerity, will sometimes fail of its effect; thus, on
this occasion, the longer she preached about the necessity of being
indulgent to the governess pupil, the more impatient I felt as I
listened. I discerned so clearly that while her professed motive was a
wish to aid the dull, though well-meaning Mdlle. Henri, her real one
was no other than a design to impress me with an idea of her own exalted
goodness and tender considerateness; so having again hastily nodded
assent to her remarks, I obviated their renewal by suddenly demanding
the compositions, in a sharp accent, and stepping from the estrade, I
proceeded to collect them. As I passed the governess-pupil, I said to
her--
"You have come in too late to receive a lesson to-day; try to be more
punctual next time."
I was behind her, and could not read in her face the effect of my not
very civil speech. Probably I should not have troubled myself to do so,
had I been full in front; but I observed that she immediately began
to slip her books into her cabas again; and, presently, after I had
returned to the estrade, while I was arranging the mass of compositions,
I heard the folding-door again open and close; and, on looking up, I
perceived her place vacant. I thought to myself, "She will consider her
first attempt at taking a lesson in English something of a failure;" and
I wondered whether she had departed in the sulks, or whether stupidity
had induced her to take my words too literally, or, finally, whether
my irritable tone had wounded her feelings. The last notion I dismissed
almost as soon as I had conceived it, for not having seen any appearance
of sensitiveness in any human face since my arrival in Belgium, I had
begun to regard it almost as a fabulous quality. Whether her physiognomy
announced it I could not tell, for her speedy exit had allowed me no
time to ascertain the circumstance. I had, indeed, on two or three
previous occasions, caught a passing view of her (as I believe has been
mentioned before); but I had never stopped to scrutinize either her face
or person, and had but the most vague idea of her general appearance.
Just as I had finished rolling up the compositions, the four o'clock
bell rang; with my accustomed alertness in obeying that signal, I
grasped my hat and evacuated the premises.
CHAPTER XIV.
IF I was punctual in quitting Mdlle. Reuter's domicile, I was at least
equally punctual in arriving there; I came the next day at five minutes
before two, and on reaching the schoolroom door, before I opened it, I
heard a rapid, gabbling sound, which warned me that the "priere du midi"
was not yet concluded. I waited the termination thereof; it would have
been impious to intrude my heretical presence during its progress. How
the repeater of the prayer did cackle and splutter! I never before or
since heard language enounced with such steam-engine haste. "Notre Pere
qui etes au ciel" went off like a shot; then followed an address to
Marie "vierge celeste, reine des anges, maison d'or, tour d'ivoire!" and
then an invocation to the saint of the day; and then down they all sat,
and the solemn (?) rite was over; and I entered, flinging the door wide
and striding in fast, as it was my wont to do now; for I had found
that in entering with aplomb, and mounting the estrade with emphasis,
consisted the grand secret of ensuring immediate silence. The
folding-doors between the two classes, opened for the prayer, were
instantly closed; a maitresse, work-box in hand, took her seat at her
appropriate desk; the pupils sat still with their pens and books before
them; my three beauties in the van, now well humbled by a demeanour of
consistent coolness, sat erect with their hands folded quietly on their
knees; they had given up giggling and whispering to each other, and no
longer ventured to utter pert speeches in my presence; they now only
talked to me occasionally with their eyes, by means of which organs
they could still, however, say very audacious and coquettish things. Had
affection, goodness, modesty, real talent, ever employed those bright
orbs as interpreters, I do not think I could have refrained from giving
a kind and encouraging, perhaps an ardent reply now and then; but as it
was, I found pleasure in answering the glance of vanity with the gaze
of stoicism. Youthful, fair, brilliant, as were many of my pupils, I can
truly say that in me they never saw any other bearing than such as an
austere, though just guardian, might have observed towards them. If any
doubt the accuracy of this assertion, as inferring more conscientious
self-denial or Scipio-like self-control than they feel disposed to
give me credit for, let them take into consideration the following
circumstances, which, while detracting from my merit, justify my
veracity.
Know, O incredulous reader! that a master stands in a somewhat different
relation towards a pretty, light-headed, probably ignorant girl, to
that occupied by a partner at a ball, or a gallant on the promenade.
A professor does not meet his pupil to see her dressed in satin and
muslin, with hair perfumed and curled, neck scarcely shaded by aerial
lace, round white arms circled with bracelets, feet dressed for the
gliding dance. It is not his business to whirl her through the waltz,
to feed her with compliments, to heighten her beauty by the flush of
gratified vanity. Neither does he encounter her on the smooth-rolled,
tree shaded Boulevard, in the green and sunny park, whither she repairs
clad in her becoming walking dress, her scarf thrown with grace over her
shoulders, her little bonnet scarcely screening her curls, the red rose
under its brim adding a new tint to the softer rose on her cheek; her
face and eyes, too, illumined with smiles, perhaps as transient as the
sunshine of the gala-day, but also quite as brilliant; it is not his
office to walk by her side, to