now crowded upon me were vivid and visible to her. Her fond
attachments, her sports and contests with a well-loved playmate, the
patient, true devotion of her child's heart, her fears, her delicate
reserves, her little trials, the last piercing pain of separation....
I retraced these things, and shook my head incredulous. She persisted.
"The child of seven years lives yet in the girl of seventeen," said
she.
"You used to be excessively fond of Mrs. Bretton," I remarked,
intending to test her. She set me right at once.
"Not _excessively_ fond," said she; "I liked her: I respected her
as I should do now: she seems to me very little altered."
"She is not much changed," I assented.
We were silent a few minutes. Glancing round the room she said, "There
are several things here that used to be at Bretton! I remember that
pincushion and that looking-glass."
Evidently she was not deceived in her estimate of her own memory; not,
at least, so far.
"You think, then, you would have known Mrs. Bretton?" I went on.
"I perfectly remembered her; the turn of her features, her olive
complexion, and black hair, her height, her walk, her voice."
"Dr. Bretton, of course," I pursued, "would be out of the question:
and, indeed, as I saw your first interview with him, I am aware that
he appeared to you as a stranger."
"That first night I was puzzled," she answered.
"How did the recognition between him and your father come about?"
"They exchanged cards. The names Graham Bretton and Home de
Bassompierre gave rise to questions and explanations. That was on the
second day; but before then I was beginning to know something."
"How--know something?"
"Why," she said, "how strange it is that most people seem so slow to
feel the truth--not to see, but _feel_! When Dr. Bretton had
visited me a few times, and sat near and talked to me; when I had
observed the look in his eyes, the expression about his mouth, the
form of his chin, the carriage of his head, and all that we _do_
observe in persons who approach us--how could I avoid being led by
association to think of Graham Bretton? Graham was slighter than he,
and not grown so tall, and had a smoother face, and longer and lighter
hair, and spoke--not so deeply--more like a girl; but yet _he_ is
Graham, just as _I_ am little Polly, or you are Lucy Snowe."
I thought the same, but I wondered to find my thoughts hers: there are
certain things in which we so rarely meet with our double that it
seems a miracle when that chance befalls.
"You and Graham were once playmates."
"And do you remember that?" she questioned in her turn.
"No doubt he will remember it also," said I.
"I have not asked him: few things would surprise me so much as to find
that he did. I suppose his disposition is still gay and careless?"
"Was it so formerly? Did it so strike you? Do you thus remember him?"
"I scarcely remember him in any other light. Sometimes he was
studious; sometimes he was merry: but whether busy with his books or
disposed for play, it was chiefly the books or game he thought of; not
much heeding those with whom he read or amused himself."
"Yet to you he was partial."
"Partial to me? Oh, no! he had other playmates--his school-fellows; I
was of little consequence to him, except on Sundays: yes, he was kind
on Sundays. I remember walking with him hand-in-hand to St. Mary's,
and his finding the places in my prayer-book; and how good and still
he was on Sunday evenings! So mild for such a proud, lively boy; so
patient with all my blunders in reading; and so wonderfully to be
depended on, for he never spent those evenings from home: I had a
constant fear that he would accept some invitation and forsake us; but
he never did, nor seemed ever to wish to do it. Thus, of course, it
can be no more. I suppose Sunday will now be Dr. Bretton's dining-out
day....?"
"Children, come down!" here called Mrs. Bretton from below. Paulina
would still have lingered, but I inclined to descend: we went down.
CHAPTER XXV.
THE LITTLE COUNTESS.
Cheerful as my godmother naturally was, and entertaining as, for our
sakes, she made a point of being, there was no true enjoyment that
evening at La Terrasse, till, through the wild howl of the winter-
night, were heard the signal sounds of arrival. How often, while women
and girls sit warm at snug fire-sides, their hearts and imaginations
are doomed to divorce from the comfort surrounding their persons,
forced out by night to wander through dark ways, to dare stress of
weather, to contend with the snow-blast, to wait at lonely gates and
stiles in wildest storms, watching and listening to see and hear the
father, the son, the husband coming home.
Father and son came at last to the chateau: for the Count de
Bassompierre that night accompanied Dr. Bretton. I know not which of
our trio heard the horses first; the asperity, the violence of the
weather warranted our running down into the hall to meet and greet the
two riders as they came in; but they warned us to keep our distance:
both were white--two mountains of snow; and indeed Mrs. Bretton,
seeing their condition, ordered them instantly to the kitchen;
prohibiting them, at their peril, from setting foot on her carpeted
staircase till they had severally put off that mask of Old Christmas
they now affected. Into the kitchen, however, we could not help
following them: it was a large old Dutch kitchen, picturesque and
pleasant. The little white Countess danced in a circle about her
equally white sire, clapping her hands and crying, "Papa, papa, you
look like an enormous Polar bear."
The bear shook himself, and the little sprite fled far from the frozen
shower. Back she came, however, laughing, and eager to aid in removing
the arctic disguise. The Count, at last issuing from his dreadnought,
threatened to overwhelm her with it as with an avalanche.
"Come, then," said she, bending to invite the fall, and when it was
playfully advanced above her head, bounding out of reach like some
little chamois.
Her movements had the supple softness, the velvet grace of a kitten;
her laugh was clearer than the ring of silver and crystal; as she took
her sire's cold hands and rubbed them, and stood on tiptoe to reach
his lips for