the ground before him.
"How is Polly's papa?" was the reply, as she leaned on his knee, and
gazed up into his face.
It was not a noisy, not a wordy scene: for that I was thankful; but it
was a scene of feeling too brimful, and which, because the cup did not
foam up high or furiously overflow, only oppressed one the more. On
all occasions of vehement, unrestrained expansion, a sense of disdain
or ridicule comes to the weary spectator's relief; whereas I have ever
felt most burdensome that sort of sensibility which bends of its own
will, a giant slave under the sway of good sense.
Mr. Home was a stern-featured--perhaps I should rather say, a hard-
featured man: his forehead was knotty, and his cheekbones were marked
and prominent. The character of his face was quite Scotch; but there
was feeling in his eye, and emotion in his now agitated countenance.
His northern accent in speaking harmonised with his physiognomy. He
was at once proud-looking and homely-looking. He laid his hand on the
child's uplifted head. She said--"Kiss Polly."
He kissed her. I wished she would utter some hysterical cry, so that I
might get relief and be at ease. She made wonderfully little noise:
she seemed to have got what she wanted--_all_ she wanted, and to
be in a trance of content. Neither in mien nor in features was this
creature like her sire, and yet she was of his strain: her mind had
been filled from his, as the cup from the flagon.
Indisputably, Mr. Home owned manly self-control, however he might
secretly feel on some matters. "Polly," he said, looking down on his
little girl, "go into the hall; you will see papa's great-coat lying
on a chair; put your hand into the pockets, you will find a pocket-
handkerchief there; bring it to me."
She obeyed; went and returned deftly and nimbly. He was talking to
Mrs. Bretton when she came back, and she waited with the handkerchief
in her hand. It was a picture, in its way, to see her, with her tiny
stature, and trim, neat shape, standing at his knee. Seeing that he
continued to talk, apparently unconscious of her return, she took his
hand, opened the unresisting fingers, insinuated into them the
handkerchief, and closed them upon it one by one. He still seemed not
to see or to feel her; but by-and-by, he lifted her to his knee; she
nestled against him, and though neither looked at nor spoke to the
other for an hour following, I suppose both were satisfied.
During tea, the minute thing's movements and behaviour gave, as usual,
full occupation to the eye. First she directed Warren, as he placed
the chairs.
"Put papa's chair here, and mine near it, between papa and Mrs.
Bretton: _I_ must hand his tea."
She took her own seat, and beckoned with her hand to her father.
"Be near me, as if we were at home, papa."
And again, as she intercepted his cup in passing, and would stir the
sugar, and put in the cream herself, "I always did it for you at home;
papa: nobody could do it as well, not even your own self."
Throughout the meal she continued her attentions: rather absurd they
were. The sugar-tongs were too wide for one of her hands, and she had
to use both in wielding them; the weight of the silver cream-ewer, the
bread-and-butter plates, the very cup and saucer, tasked her
insufficient strength and dexterity; but she would lift this, hand
that, and luckily contrived through it all to break nothing. Candidly
speaking, I thought her a little busy-body; but her father, blind like
other parents, seemed perfectly content to let her wait on him, and
even wonderfully soothed by her offices.
"She is my comfort!" he could not help saying to Mrs. Bretton. That
lady had her own "comfort" and nonpareil on a much larger scale, and,
for the moment, absent; so she sympathised with his foible.
This second "comfort" came on the stage in the course of the evening.
I knew this day had been fixed for his return, and was aware that Mrs.
Bretton had been expecting him through all its hours. We were seated
round the fire, after tea, when Graham joined our circle: I should
rather say, broke it up--for, of course, his arrival made a bustle;
and then, as Mr. Graham was fasting, there was refreshment to be
provided. He and Mr. Home met as old acquaintance; of the little girl
he took no notice for a time.
His meal over, and numerous questions from his mother answered, he
turned from the table to the hearth. Opposite where he had placed
himself was seated Mr. Home, and at his elbow, the child. When I say
_child_ I use an inappropriate and undescriptive term--a term
suggesting any picture rather than that of the demure little person in
a mourning frock and white chemisette, that might just have fitted a
good-sized doll--perched now on a high chair beside a stand, whereon
was her toy work-box of white varnished wood, and holding in her hands
a shred of a handkerchief, which she was professing to hem, and at
which she bored perseveringly with a needle, that in her fingers
seemed almost a skewer, pricking herself ever and anon, marking the
cambric with a track of minute red dots; occasionally starting when
the perverse weapon--swerving from her control--inflicted a deeper
stab than usual; but still silent, diligent, absorbed, womanly.
Graham was at that time a handsome, faithless-looking youth of
sixteen. I say faithless-looking, not because he was really of a very
perfidious disposition, but because the epithet strikes me as proper
to describe the fair, Celtic (not Saxon) character of his good looks;
his waved light auburn hair, his supple symmetry, his smile frequent,
and destitute neither of fascination nor of subtlety (in no bad
sense). A spoiled, whimsical boy he was in those days.
"Mother," he said, after eyeing the little figure before him in
silence for some time, and when the temporary absence of Mr. Home from
the room relieved him from the half-laughing bashfulness, which was
all he knew of timidity---"Mother, I see a young lady in the present
society to whom I have not been introduced."
"Mr. Home's little girl, I suppose you mean," said his mother.
"Indeed, ma'am," replied her son, "I consider your expression of the
least ceremonious: Miss Home _I_ should certainly have said, in
venturing to speak of the gentlewoman to whom