as far as distant observation could enable me to
judge, she seemed to enjoy him with the frank ease of a ward with an
indulgent guardian. I had seen her run up to him, put her arm through
his, and hang upon him. Once, when she did so, a curious sensation had
struck through me--a disagreeable anticipatory sensation--one of the
family of presentiments, I suppose--but I refused to analyze or dwell
upon it. While watching this girl, Mademoiselle Sauveur by name, and
following the gleam of her bright silk robe (she was always richly
dressed, for she was said to be wealthy) through the flowers and the
glancing leaves of tender emerald, my eyes became dazzled--they
closed; my lassitude, the warmth of the day, the hum of bees and
birds, all lulled me, and at last I slept.
Two hours stole over me. Ere I woke, the sun had declined out of sight
behind the towering houses, the garden and the room were grey, bees
had gone homeward, and the flowers were closing; the party of guests,
too, had vanished; each alley was void.
On waking, I felt much at ease--not chill, as I ought to have been
after sitting so still for at least two hours; my cheek and arms were
not benumbed by pressure against the hard desk. No wonder. Instead of
the bare wood on which I had laid them, I found a thick shawl,
carefully folded, substituted for support, and another shawl (both
taken from the corridor where such things hung) wrapped warmly round
me.
Who had done this? Who was my friend? Which of the teachers? Which of
the pupils? None, except St. Pierre, was inimical to me; but which of
them had the art, the thought, the habit, of benefiting thus tenderly?
Which of them had a step so quiet, a hand so gentle, but I should have
heard or felt her, if she had approached or touched me in a day-sleep?
As to Ginevra Fanshawe, that bright young creature was not gentle at
all, and would certainly have pulled me out of my chair, if she had
meddled in the matter. I said at last: "It is Madame Beck's doing; she
has come in, seen me asleep, and thought I might take cold. She
considers me a useful machine, answering well the purpose for which it
was hired; so would not have me needlessly injured. And now,"
methought, "I'll take a walk; the evening is fresh, and not very
chill."
So I opened the glass door and stepped into the berceau.
I went to my own alley: had it been dark, or even dusk, I should have
hardly ventured there, for I had not yet forgotten the curious
illusion of vision (if illusion it were) experienced in that place
some months ago. But a ray of the setting sun burnished still the grey
crown of Jean Baptiste; nor had all the birds of the garden yet
vanished into their nests amongst the tufted shrubs and thick wall-
ivy. I paced up and down, thinking almost the same thoughts I had
pondered that night when I buried my glass jar--how I should make some
advance in life, take another step towards an independent position;
for this train of reflection, though not lately pursued, had never by
me been wholly abandoned; and whenever a certain eye was averted from
me, and a certain countenance grew dark with unkindness and injustice,
into that track of speculation did I at once strike; so that, little
by little, I had laid half a plan.
"Living costs little," said I to myself, "in this economical town of
Villette, where people are more sensible than I understand they are in
dear old England--infinitely less worried about appearance, and less
emulous of display--where nobody is in the least ashamed to be quite
as homely and saving as he finds convenient. House-rent, in a
prudently chosen situation, need not be high. When I shall have saved
one thousand francs, I will take a tenement with one large room, and
two or three smaller ones, furnish the first with a few benches and
desks, a black tableau, an estrade for myself; upon it a chair and
table, with a sponge and some white chalks; begin with taking day-
pupils, and so work my way upwards. Madame Beck's commencement was--as
I have often heard her say--from no higher starting-point, and where
is she now? All these premises and this garden are hers, bought with
her money; she has a competency already secured for old age, and a
flourishing establishment under her direction, which will furnish a
career for her children.
"Courage, Lucy Snowe! With self-denial and economy now, and steady
exertion by-and-by, an object in life need not fail you. Venture not
to complain that such an object is too selfish, too limited, and lacks
interest; be content to labour for independence until you have proved,
by winning that prize, your right to look higher. But afterwards, is
there nothing more for me in life--no true home--nothing to be dearer
to me than myself, and by its paramount preciousness, to draw from me
better things than I care to culture for myself only? Nothing, at
whose feet I can willingly lay down the whole burden of human egotism,
and gloriously take up the nobler charge of labouring and living for
others? I suppose, Lucy Snowe, the orb of your life is not to be so
rounded: for you, the crescent-phase must suffice. Very good. I see a
huge mass of my fellow-creatures in no better circumstances. I see
that a great many men, and more women, hold their span of life on
conditions of denial and privation. I find no reason why I should be
of the few favoured. I believe in some blending of hope and sunshine
sweetening the worst lots. I believe that this life is not all;
neither the beginning nor the end. I believe while I tremble; I trust
while I weep."
So this subject is done with. It is right to look our life-accounts
bravely in the face now and then, and settle them honestly. And he is
a poor self-swindler who lies to himself while he reckons the items,
and sets down under the head--happiness that which is misery. Call
anguish--anguish, and despair--despair; write both down in strong
characters with a resolute pen: you will the better pay your debt to
Doom. Falsify: insert "privilege" where you should have written
"pain;" and see if your mighty creditor will allow the fraud