We will go back."
"Dr. John, this is a sudden change."
"Not it: or if it be, there are good reasons for it--two good reasons:
I have told you one. But now let us re-enter."
We did not easily regain our seats; the lottery was begun, and all was
excited confusion; crowds blocked the sort of corridor along which we
had to pass: it was necessary to pause for a time. Happening to glance
round--indeed I half fancied I heard my name pronounced--I saw quite
near, the ubiquitous, the inevitable M. Paul. He was looking at me
gravely and intently: at me, or rather at my pink dress--sardonic
comment on which gleamed in his eye. Now it was his habit to indulge
in strictures on the dress, both of the teachers and pupils, at Madame
Beck's--a habit which the former, at least, held to be an offensive
impertinence: as yet I had not suffered from it--my sombre daily
attire not being calculated to attract notice. I was in no mood to
permit any new encroachment to-night: rather than accept his banter, I
would ignore his presence, and accordingly steadily turned my face to
the sleeve of Dr. John's coat; finding in that same black sleeve a
prospect more redolent of pleasure and comfort, more genial, more
friendly, I thought, than was offered by the dark little Professor's
unlovely visage. Dr. John seemed unconsciously to sanction the
preference by looking down and saying in his kind voice, "Ay, keep
close to my side, Lucy: these crowding burghers are no respecters of
persons."
I could not, however, be true to myself. Yielding to some influence,
mesmeric or otherwise--an influence unwelcome, displeasing, but
effective--I again glanced round to see if M. Paul was gone. No, there
he stood on the same spot, looking still, but with a changed eye; he
had penetrated my thought, and read my wish to shun him. The mocking
but not ill-humoured gaze was turned to a swarthy frown, and when I
bowed, with a view to conciliation, I got only the stiffest and
sternest of nods in return.
"Whom have you made angry, Lucy?" whispered Dr. Bretton, smiling. "Who
is that savage-looking friend of yours?"
"One of the professors at Madame Beck's: a very cross little man."
"He looks mighty cross just now: what have you done to him? What is it
all about? Ah, Lucy, Lucy! tell me the meaning of this."
"No mystery, I assure you. M. Emanuel is very exigeant, and because I
looked at your coat-sleeve, instead of curtseying and dipping to him,
he thinks I have failed in respect."
"The little--" began Dr. John: I know not what more he would have
added, for at that moment I was nearly thrown down amongst the feet of
the crowd. M. Paul had rudely pushed past, and was elbowing his way
with such utter disregard to the convenience and security of all
around, that a very uncomfortable pressure was the consequence.
"I think he is what he himself would call 'mechant,'" said Dr.
Bretton. I thought so, too.
Slowly and with difficulty we made our way along the passage, and at
last regained our seats. The drawing of the lottery lasted nearly an
hour; it was an animating and amusing scene; and as we each held
tickets, we shared in the alternations of hope and fear raised by each
turn of the wheel. Two little girls, of five and six years old, drew
the numbers: and the prizes were duly proclaimed from the platform.
These prizes were numerous, though of small value. It so fell out that
Dr. John and I each gained one: mine was a cigar-case, his a lady's
head-dress--a most airy sort of blue and silver turban, with a
streamer of plumage on one side, like a snowy cloud. He was
excessively anxious to make an exchange; but I could not be brought to
hear reason, and to this day I keep my cigar-case: it serves, when I
look at it, to remind me of old times, and one happy evening.
Dr. John, for his part, held his turban at arm's length between his
finger and thumb, and looked at it with a mixture of reverence and
embarrassment highly provocative of laughter. The contemplation over,
he was about coolly to deposit the delicate fabric on the ground
between his feet; he seemed to have no shadow of an idea of the
treatment or stowage it ought to receive: if his mother had not come
to the rescue, I think he would finally have crushed it under his arm
like an opera-hat; she restored it to the band-box whence it had
issued.
Graham was quite cheerful all the evening, and his cheerfulness seemed
natural and unforced. His demeanour, his look, is not easily
described; there was something in it peculiar, and, in its way,
original. I read in it no common mastery of the passions, and a fund
of deep and healthy strength which, without any exhausting effort,
bore down Disappointment and extracted her fang. His manner, now,
reminded me of qualities I had noticed in him when professionally
engaged amongst the poor, the guilty, and the suffering, in the Basse-
Ville: he looked at once determined, enduring, and sweet-tempered. Who
could help liking him? _He_ betrayed no weakness which harassed
all your feelings with considerations as to how its faltering must be
propped; from _him_ broke no irritability which startled calm and
quenched mirth; _his_ lips let fall no caustic that burned to the
bone; _his_ eye shot no morose shafts that went cold, and rusty,
and venomed through your heart: beside him was rest and refuge--around
him, fostering sunshine.
And yet he had neither forgiven nor forgotten Miss Fanshawe. Once
angered, I doubt if Dr. Bretton were to be soon propitiated--once
alienated, whether he were ever to be reclaimed. He looked at her more
than once; not stealthily or humbly, but with a movement of hardy,
open observation. De Hamal was now a fixture beside her; Mrs.
Cholmondeley sat near, and they and she were wholly absorbed in the
discourse, mirth, and excitement, with which the crimson seats were as
much astir as any plebeian part of the hall. In the course of some
apparently animated discussion, Ginevra once or twice lifted her hand
and arm; a handsome bracelet gleamed upon the latter. I saw that its
gleam flickered in Dr. John's eye--quickening therein a derisive,
ireful sparkle; he laughed:----
"I think," he said, "I will lay my turban on my wonted altar of
offerings; there, at any rate,