chance might lead, in a still
ecstasy of freedom and enjoyment; and I got--I know not how--I got
into the heart of city life. I saw and felt London at last: I got into
the Strand; I went up Cornhill; I mixed with the life passing along; I
dared the perils of crossings. To do this, and to do it utterly alone,
gave me, perhaps an irrational, but a real pleasure. Since those days,
I have seen the West End, the parks, the fine squares; but I love the
city far better. The city seems so much more in earnest: its business,
its rush, its roar, are such serious things, sights, and sounds. The
city is getting its living--the West End but enjoying its pleasure. At
the West End you may be amused, but in the city you are deeply
excited.
Faint, at last, and hungry (it was years since I had felt such healthy
hunger), I returned, about two o'clock, to my dark, old, and quiet
inn. I dined on two dishes--a plain joint and vegetables; both seemed
excellent: how much better than the small, dainty messes Miss
Marchmont's cook used to send up to my kind, dead mistress and me, and
to the discussion of which we could not bring half an appetite between
us! Delightfully tired, I lay down, on three chairs for an hour (the
room did not boast a sofa). I slept, then I woke and thought for two
hours.
My state of mind, and all accompanying circumstances, were just now
such as most to favour the adoption of a new, resolute, and daring--
perhaps desperate--line of action. I had nothing to lose. Unutterable
loathing of a desolate existence past, forbade return. If I failed in
what I now designed to undertake, who, save myself, would suffer? If I
died far away from--home, I was going to say, but I had no home--from
England, then, who would weep?
I might suffer; I was inured to suffering: death itself had not, I
thought, those terrors for me which it has for the softly reared. I
had, ere this, looked on the thought of death with a quiet eye.
Prepared, then, for any consequences, I formed a project.
That same evening I obtained from my friend, the waiter, information
respecting, the sailing of vessels for a certain continental port,
Boue-Marine. No time, I found, was to be lost: that very night I must
take my berth. I might, indeed, have waited till the morning before
going on board, but would not run the risk of being too late.
"Better take your berth at once, ma'am," counselled the waiter. I
agreed with him, and having discharged my bill, and acknowledged my
friend's services at a rate which I now know was princely, and which
in his eyes must have seemed absurd--and indeed, while pocketing the
cash, he smiled a faint smile which intimated his opinion of the
donor's _savoir-faire_--he proceeded to call a coach. To the
driver he also recommended me, giving at the same time an injunction
about taking me, I think, to the wharf, and not leaving me to the
watermen; which that functionary promised to observe, but failed in
keeping his promise: on the contrary, he offered me up as an oblation,
served me as a dripping roast, making me alight in the midst of a
throng of watermen.
This was an uncomfortable crisis. It was a dark night. The coachman
instantly drove off as soon as he had got his fare: the watermen
commenced a struggle for me and my trunk. Their oaths I hear at this
moment: they shook my philosophy more than did the night, or the
isolation, or the strangeness of the scene. One laid hands on my
trunk. I looked on and waited quietly; but when another laid hands on
me, I spoke up, shook off his touch, stepped at once into a boat,
desired austerely that the trunk should be placed beside me--"Just
there,"--which was instantly done; for the owner of the boat I had
chosen became now an ally: I was rowed off.
Black was the river as a torrent of ink; lights glanced on it from the
piles of building round, ships rocked on its bosom. They rowed me up
to several vessels; I read by lantern-light their names painted in
great white letters on a dark ground. "The Ocean," "The Phoenix," "The
Consort," "The Dolphin," were passed in turns; but "The Vivid" was my
ship, and it seemed she lay further down.
Down the sable flood we glided, I thought of the Styx, and of Charon
rowing some solitary soul to the Land of Shades. Amidst the strange
scene, with a chilly wind blowing in my face and midnight clouds
dropping rain above my head; with two rude rowers for companions,
whose insane oaths still tortured my ear, I asked myself if I was
wretched or terrified. I was neither. Often in my life have I been far
more so under comparatively safe circumstances. "How is this?" said I.
"Methinks I am animated and alert, instead of being depressed and
apprehensive?" I could not tell how it was.
"THE VIVID" started out, white and glaring, from the black night at
last.--"Here you are!" said the waterman, and instantly demanded six
shillings.
"You ask too much," I said. He drew off from the vessel and swore he
would not embark me till I paid it. A young man, the steward as I
found afterwards, was looking over the ship's side; he grinned a smile
in anticipation of the coming contest; to disappoint him, I paid the
money. Three times that afternoon I had given crowns where I should
have given shillings; but I consoled myself with the reflection, "It
is the price of experience."
"They've cheated you!" said the steward exultingly when I got on
board. I answered phlegmatically that "I knew it," and went below.
A stout, handsome, and showy woman was in the ladies' cabin. I asked
to be shown my berth; she looked hard at me, muttered something about
its being unusual for passengers to come on board at that hour, and
seemed disposed to be less than civil. What a face she had--so comely
--so insolent and so selfish!
"Now that I am on board, I shall certainly stay here," was my answer.
"I will trouble you to show me my berth."
She complied, but sullenly. I took off my bonnet, arranged my things,
and lay down. Some difficulties had been passed through; a sort of
victory was