named this theme: "Human Justice."
Human Justice! What was I to make of it? Blank, cold abstraction,
unsuggestive to me of one inspiring idea; and there stood M. Emanuel,
sad as Saul, and stern as Joab, and there triumphed his accusers.
At these two I looked. I was gathering my courage to tell them that I
would neither write nor speak another word for their satisfaction,
that their theme did not suit, nor their presence inspire me, and
that, notwithstanding, whoever threw the shadow of a doubt on M.
Emanuel's honour, outraged that truth of which they had announced
themselves the--champions: I _meant_ to utter all this, I say,
when suddenly, a light darted on memory.
Those two faces looking out of the forest of long hair, moustache, and
whisker--those two cold yet bold, trustless yet presumptuous visages--
were the same faces, the very same that, projected in full gaslight
from behind the pillars of a portico, had half frightened me to death
on the night of my desolate arrival in Villette. These, I felt morally
certain, were the very heroes who had driven a friendless foreigner
beyond her reckoning and her strength, chased her breathless over a
whole quarter of the town.
"Pious mentors!" thought I. "Pure guides for youth! If `Human Justice'
were what she ought to be, you two would scarce hold your present
post, or enjoy your present credit."
An idea once seized, I fell to work. "Human Justice" rushed before me
in novel guise, a red, random beldame, with arms akimbo. I saw her in
her house, the den of confusion: servants called to her for orders or
help which she did not give; beggars stood at her door waiting and
starving unnoticed; a swarm of children, sick and quarrelsome, crawled
round her feet, and yelled in her ears appeals for notice, sympathy,
cure, redress. The honest woman cared for none of these things. She
had a warm seat of her own by the fire, she had her own solace in a
short black pipe, and a bottle of Mrs. Sweeny's soothing syrup; she
smoked and she sipped, and she enjoyed her paradise; and whenever a
cry of the suffering souls about her 'pierced her ears too keenly--my
jolly dame seized the poker or the hearth-brush: if the offender was
weak, wronged, and sickly, she effectually settled him: if he was
strong, lively, and violent, she only menaced, then plunged her hand
in her deep pouch, and flung a liberal shower of sugar-plums.
Such was the sketch of "Human Justice," scratched hurriedly on paper,
and placed at the service of Messrs. Boissec and Rochemorte. M.
Emanuel read it over my shoulder. Waiting no comment, I curtsied to
the trio, and withdrew.
After school that day, M. Paul and I again met. Of course the meeting
did not at first run smooth; there was a crow to pluck with him; that
forced examination could not be immediately digested. A crabbed
dialogue terminated in my being called "une petite moqueuse et sans-
coeur," and in Monsieur's temporary departure.
Not wishing him to go quite away, only desiring he should feel that
such a transport as he had that day given way to, could not be
indulged with perfect impunity, I was not sorry to see him, soon
after, gardening in the berceau. He approached the glass door; I drew
near also. We spoke of some flowers growing round it. By-and-by
Monsieur laid down his spade; by-and-by he recommenced conversation,
passed to other subjects, and at last touched a point of interest.
Conscious that his proceeding of that day was specially open to a
charge of extravagance, M. Paul half apologized; he half regretted,
too, the fitfulness of his moods at all times, yet he hinted that some
allowance ought to be made for him. "But," said he, "I can hardly
expect it at your hands, Miss Lucy; you know neither me, nor my
position, nor my history."
His history. I took up the word at once; I pursued the idea.
"No, Monsieur," I rejoined. "Of course, as you say, I know neither
your history, nor your position, nor your sacrifices, nor any of your
sorrows, or trials, or affections, or fidelities. Oh, no! I know
nothing about you; you are for me altogether a stranger."
"Hein?" he murmured, arching his brows in surprise.
"You know, Monsieur, I only see you in classe--stern, dogmatic, hasty,
imperious. I only hear of you in town as active and wilful, quick to
originate, hasty to lead, but slow to persuade, and hard to bend. A
man like you, without ties, can have no attachments; without
dependants, no duties. All we, with whom you come in contact, are
machines, which you thrust here and there, inconsiderate of their
feelings. You seek your recreations in public, by the light of the
evening chandelier: this school and yonder college are your workshops,
where you fabricate the ware called pupils. I don't so much as know
where you live; it is natural to take it for granted that you have no
home, and need none."
"I am judged," said he. "Your opinion of me is just what I thought it
was. For you I am neither a man nor a Christian. You see me void of
affection and religion, unattached by friend or family, unpiloted by
principle or faith. It is well, Mademoiselle; such is our reward in
this life."
"You are a philosopher, Monsieur; a cynic philosopher" (and I looked
at his paletot, of which he straightway brushed the dim sleeve with
his hand), "despising the foibles of humanity--above its luxuries--
independent of its comforts."
"Et vous, Mademoiselle? vous etes proprette et douillette, et
affreusement insensible, par-dessus le marche."
"But, in short, Monsieur, now I think of it, you _must_ live
somewhere? Do tell me where; and what establishment of servants do you
keep?"
With a fearful projection of the under-lip, implying an impetus of
scorn the most decided, he broke out--
"Je vis dans un trou! I inhabit a den, Miss--a cavern, where you would
not put your dainty nose. Once, with base shame of speaking the whole
truth, I talked about my 'study' in that college: know now that this
'study' is my whole abode; my chamber is there and my drawing-room. As
for my 'establishment of servants'" (mimicking my voice) "they number
ten; les voila."
And he grimly spread, close under my eyes, his ten fingers.
"I black my boots," pursued he savagely. "I brush my paletot."
"No, Monsieur, it is too plain; you never do that," was my
parenthesis.
"Je fais mon