how surprised I was to
find, amongst a dozen letters for M. de Bassompierre, a note addressed
to Miss de Bassompierre. I spied it at once, amidst all the rest; the
handwriting was not strange; it attracted me directly. I was going to
say, 'Papa, here is another letter from Dr. Bretton;' but the 'Miss'
struck me mute. I actually never received a letter from a gentleman
before. Ought I to have shown it to papa, and let him open it and read
it first? I could not for my life, Lucy. I know so well papa's ideas
about me: he forgets my age; he thinks I am a mere school-girl; he is
not aware that other people see I am grown up as tall as I shall be;
so, with a curious mixture of feelings, some of them self-reproachful,
and some so fluttering and strong, I cannot describe them, I gave papa
his twelve letters--his herd of possessions--and kept back my one, my
ewe-lamb. It lay in my lap during breakfast, looking up at me with an
inexplicable meaning, making me feel myself a thing double-existent--a
child to that dear papa, but no more a child to myself. After
breakfast I carried my letter up-stairs, and having secured myself by
turning the key in the door, I began to study the outside of my
treasure: it was some minutes before I could get over the direction
and penetrate the seal; one does not take a strong place of this kind
by instant storm--one sits down awhile before it, as beleaguers say.
Graham's hand is like himself, Lucy, and so is his seal--all clear,
firm, and rounded--no slovenly splash of wax--a full, solid, steady
drop--a distinct impress; no pointed turns harshly pricking the optic
nerve, but a clean, mellow, pleasant manuscript, that soothes you as
you read. It is like his face--just like the chiselling of his
features: do you know his autograph?"
"I have seen it: go on."
"The seal was too beautiful to be broken, so I cut it round with my
scissors. On the point of reading the letter at last, I once more drew
back voluntarily; it was too soon yet to drink that draught--the
sparkle in the cup was so beautiful--I would watch it yet a minute.
Then I remembered all at once that I had not said my prayers that
morning. Having heard papa go down to breakfast a little earlier than
usual, I had been afraid of keeping him waiting, and had hastened to
join him as soon as dressed, thinking no harm to put off prayers till
afterwards. Some people would say I ought to have served God first and
then man; but I don't think heaven could be jealous of anything I
might do for papa. I believe I am superstitious. A voice seemed now to
say that another feeling than filial affection was in question--to
urge me to pray before I dared to read what I so longed to read--to
deny myself yet a moment, and remember first a great duty. I have had
these impulses ever since I can remember. I put the letter down and
said my prayers, adding, at the end, a strong entreaty that whatever
happened, I might not be tempted or led to cause papa any sorrow, and
might never, in caring for others, neglect him. The very thought of
such a possibility, so pierced my heart that it made me cry. But
still, Lucy, I felt that in time papa would have to be taught the
truth, managed, and induced to hear reason.
"I read the letter. Lucy, life is said to be all disappointment.
_I_ was not disappointed. Ere I read, and while I read, my heart
did more than throb--it trembled fast--every quiver seemed like the
pant of an animal athirst, laid down at a well and drinking; and the
well proved quite full, gloriously clear; it rose up munificently of
its own impulse; I saw the sun through its gush, and not a mote, Lucy,
no moss, no insect, no atom in the thrice-refined golden gurgle.
"Life," she went on, "is said to be full of pain to some. I have read
biographies where the wayfarer seemed to journey on from suffering to
suffering; where Hope flew before him fast, never alighting so near,
or lingering so long, as to give his hand a chance of one realizing
grasp. I have read of those who sowed in tears, and whose harvest, so
far from being reaped in joy, perished by untimely blight, or was
borne off by sudden whirlwind; and, alas! some of these met the winter
with empty garners, and died of utter want in the darkest and coldest
of the year."
"Was it their fault, Paulina, that they of whom you speak thus died?"
"Not always their fault. Some of them were good endeavouring people. I
am not endeavouring, nor actively good, yet God has caused me to grow
in sun, due moisture, and safe protection, sheltered, fostered,
taught, by my dear father; and now--now--another comes. Graham loves
me."
For some minutes we both paused on this climax.
"Does your father know?" I inquired, in a low voice.
"Graham spoke with deep respect of papa, but implied that he dared not
approach that quarter as yet; he must first prove his worth: he added
that he must have some light respecting myself and my own feelings ere
he ventured to risk a step in the matter elsewhere."
"How did you reply?"
"I replied briefly, but I did not repulse him. Yet I almost trembled
for fear of making the answer too cordial: Graham's tastes are so
fastidious. I wrote it three times--chastening and subduing the
phrases at every rescript; at last, having confected it till it seemed
to me to resemble a morsel of ice flavoured with ever so slight a zest
of fruit or sugar, I ventured to seal and despatch it."
"Excellent, Paulina! Your instinct is fine; you understand Dr.
Bretton."
"But how must I manage about papa? There I am still in pain."
"Do not manage at all. Wait now. Only maintain no further
correspondence till your father knows all, and gives his sanction."
"Will he ever give it?"
"Time will show. Wait."
"Dr. Bretton wrote one other letter, deeply grateful for my calm,
brief note; but I anticipated your advice, by saying, that while my
sentiments continued the same, I could not, without my fathers
knowledge, write again."
"You acted as you ought to have done; so Dr. Bretton will