is
Autumn; he is to be with me ere the mists of November come. My school
flourishes, my house is ready: I have made him a little library,
filled its shelves with the books he left in my care: I have
cultivated out of love for him (I was naturally no florist) the plants
he preferred, and some of them are yet in bloom. I thought I loved him
when he went away; I love him now in another degree: he is more my
own.
The sun passes the equinox; the days shorten, the leaves grow sere;
but---he is coming.
Frosts appear at night; November has sent his fogs in advance; the
wind takes its autumn moan; but--he is coming.
The skies hang full and dark--a wrack sails from the west; the clouds
cast themselves into strange forms--arches and broad radiations; there
rise resplendent mornings--glorious, royal, purple as monarch in his
state; the heavens are one flame; so wild are they, they rival battle
at its thickest--so bloody, they shame Victory in her pride. I know
some signs of the sky; I have noted them ever since childhood. God
watch that sail! Oh! guard it!
The wind shifts to the west. Peace, peace, Banshee--"keening" at every
window! It will rise--it will swell--it shrieks out long: wander as I
may through the house this night, I cannot lull the blast. The
advancing hours make it strong: by midnight, all sleepless watchers
hear and fear a wild south-west storm. That storm roared frenzied, for
seven days. It did not cease till the Atlantic was strewn with wrecks:
it did not lull till the deeps had gorged their full of sustenance.
Not till the destroying angel of tempest had achieved his perfect
work, would he fold the wings whose waft was thunder--the tremor of
whose plumes was storm.
Peace, be still! Oh! a thousand weepers, praying in agony on waiting
shores, listened for that voice, but it was not uttered--not uttered
till; when the hush came, some could not feel it: till, when the sun
returned, his light was night to some!
Here pause: pause at once. There is enough said. Trouble no quiet,
kind heart; leave sunny imaginations hope. Let it be theirs to
conceive the delight of joy born again fresh out of great terror, the
rapture of rescue from peril, the wondrous reprieve from dread, the
fruition of return. Let them picture union and a happy succeeding
life.
Madame Beck prospered all the days of her life; so did Pere Silas;
Madame Walravens fulfilled her ninetieth year before she died.
Farewell.
THE END.
