St. Pierre," he went on, recovering himself, for his voice
had altered a little, "she once intended to be Madame Emanuel; and I
don't know whither I might have been led, but for yonder little
lattice with the light. Ah, magic lattice! what miracles of discovery
hast thou wrought! Yes," he pursued, "I have seen her rancours, her
vanities, her levities--not only here, but elsewhere: I have witnessed
what bucklers me against all her arts: I am safe from poor Zelie."
"And my pupils," he presently recommenced, "those blondes jeunes
filles--so mild and meek--I have seen the most reserved--romp like
boys, the demurest--snatch grapes from the walls, shake pears from the
trees. When the English teacher came, I saw her, marked her early
preference for this alley, noticed her taste for seclusion, watched
her well, long before she and I came to speaking terms; do you
recollect my once coming silently and offering you a little knot of
white violets when we were strangers?"
"I recollect it. I dried the violets, kept them, and have them still."
"It pleased me when you took them peacefully and promptly, without
prudery--that sentiment which I ever dread to excite, and which, when
it is revealed in eye or gesture, I vindictively detest. To return.
Not only did _I_ watch you; but often--especially at eventide--
another guardian angel was noiselessly hovering near: night after
night my cousin Beck has stolen down yonder steps, and glidingly
pursued your movements when you did not see her."
"But, Monsieur, you could not from the distance of that window see
what passed in this garden at night?"
"By moonlight I possibly might with a glass--I use a glass--but the
garden itself is open to me. In the shed, at the bottom, there is a
door leading into a court, which communicates with the college; of
that door I possess the key, and thus come and go at pleasure. This
afternoon I came through it, and found you asleep in classe; again
this evening I have availed myself of the same entrance."
I could not help saying, "If you were a wicked, designing man, how
terrible would all this be!"
His attention seemed incapable of being arrested by this view of the
subject: he lit his cigar, and while he puffed it, leaning against a
tree, and looking at me in a cool, amused way he had when his humour
was tranquil, I thought proper to go on sermonizing him: he often
lectured me by the hour together--I did not see why I should not speak
my mind for once. So I told him my impressions concerning his Jesuit-
system.
"The knowledge it brings you is bought too dear, Monsieur; this coming
and going by stealth degrades your own dignity."
"My dignity!" he cried, laughing; "when did you ever see me trouble my
head about my dignity? It is you, Miss Lucy, who are 'digne.' How
often, in your high insular presence, have I taken a pleasure in
trampling upon, what you are pleased to call, my dignity; tearing it,
scattering it to the winds, in those mad transports you witness with
such hauteur, and which I know you think very like the ravings of a
third-rate London actor."
"Monsieur, I tell you every glance you cast from that lattice is a
wrong done to the best part of your own nature. To study the human
heart thus, is to banquet secretly and sacrilegiously on Eve's apples.
I wish you were a Protestant."
Indifferent to the wish, he smoked on. After a space of smiling yet
thoughtful silence, he said, rather suddenly--"I have seen other
things."
"What other things?"
Taking the weed from his lips, he threw the remnant amongst the
shrubs, where, for a moment, it lay glowing in the gloom.
"Look, at it," said he: "is not that spark like an eye watching you
and me?"
He took a turn down the walk; presently returning, he went on:--"I
have seen, Miss Lucy, things to me unaccountable, that have made me
watch all night for a solution, and I have not yet found it."
The tone was peculiar; my veins thrilled; he saw me shiver.
"Are you afraid? Whether is it of my words or that red jealous eye
just winking itself out?"
"I am cold; the night grows dark and late, and the air is changed; it
is time to go in."
"It is little past eight, but you shall go in soon. Answer me only
this question."
Yet he paused ere he put it. The garden was truly growing dark; dusk
had come on with clouds, and drops of rain began to patter through the
trees. I hoped he would feel this, but, for the moment, he seemed too
much absorbed to be sensible of the change.
"Mademoiselle, do you Protestants believe in the supernatural?"
"There is a difference of theory and belief on this point amongst
Protestants as amongst other sects," I answered. "Why, Monsieur, do
you ask such a question?"
"Why do you shrink and speak so faintly? Are you superstitious?"
"I am constitutionally nervous. I dislike the discussion of such
subjects. I dislike it the more because--"
"You believe?"
"No: but it has happened to me to experience impressions--"
"Since you came here?"
"Yes; not many months ago."
"Here?--in this house?"
"Yes."
"Bon! I am glad of it. I knew it, somehow; before you told me. I was
conscious of rapport between you and myself. You are patient, and I am
choleric; you are quiet and pale, and I am tanned and fiery; you are a
strict Protestant, and I am a sort of lay Jesuit: but we are alike--
there is affinity between us. Do you see it, Mademoiselle, when you
look in the glass? Do you observe that your forehead is shaped like
mine--that your eyes are cut like mine? Do you hear that you have some
of my tones of voice? Do you know that you have many of my looks? I
perceive all this, and believe that you were born under my star. Yes,
you were born under my star! Tremble! for where that is the case with
mortals, the threads of their destinies are difficult to disentangle;
knottings and catchings occur--sudden breaks leave damage in the web.
But these 'impressions,' as you say, with English caution. I, too,
have had my 'impressions.'"
"Monsieur, tell me them."
"I desire no better, and intend no less. You know the legend of this
house and garden?"
"I know it. Yes. They say that hundreds of years ago a nun was buried
here alive at the foot of