on that occasion." Thus she drew
him out.
She did not again yield to any effervescence of glee; the infantine
sparkle was exhaled for the night: she was soft, thoughtful, and
docile. It was pretty to see her bid good-night; her manner to Graham
was touched with dignity: in her very slight smile and quiet bow spoke
the Countess, and Graham could not but look grave, and bend
responsive. I saw he hardly knew how to blend together in his ideas
the dancing fairy and delicate dame.
Next day, when we were all assembled round the breakfast-table,
shivering and fresh from the morning's chill ablutions, Mrs. Bretton
pronounced a decree that nobody, who was not forced by dire necessity,
should quit her house that day.
Indeed, egress seemed next to impossible; the drift darkened the lower
panes of the casement, and, on looking out, one saw the sky and air
vexed and dim, the wind and snow in angry conflict. There was no fall
now, but what had already descended was torn up from the earth,
whirled round by brief shrieking gusts, and cast into a hundred
fantastic forms.
The Countess seconded Mrs. Bretton.
"Papa shall not go out," said she, placing a seat for herself beside
her father's arm-chair. "I will look after him. You won't go into
town, will you, papa?"
"Ay, and No," was the answer. "If you and Mrs. Bretton are _very_
good to me, Polly--kind, you know, and attentive; if you pet me in a
very nice manner, and make much of me, I may possibly be induced to
wait an hour after breakfast and see whether this razor-edged wind
settles. But, you see, you give me no breakfast; you offer me nothing:
you let me starve."
"Quick! please, Mrs. Bretton, and pour out the coffee," entreated
Paulina, "whilst I take care of the Count de Bassompierre in other
respects: since he grew into a Count, he has needed _so_ much
attention."
She separated and prepared a roll.
"There, papa, are your 'pistolets' charged," said she. "And there is
some marmalade, just the same sort of marmalade we used to have at
Bretton, and which you said was as good as if it had been conserved in
Scotland--"
"And which your little ladyship used to beg for my boy--do you
remember that?" interposed Mrs. Bretton. "Have you forgotten how you
would come to my elbow and touch my sleeve with the whisper, 'Please,
ma'am, something good for Graham--a little marmalade, or honey, or
jam?"'
"No, mamma," broke in Dr. John, laughing, yet reddening; "it surely
was not so: I could not have cared for these things."
"Did he or did he not, Paulina?"
"He liked them," asserted Paulina.
"Never blush for it, John," said Mr. Home, encouragingly. "I like them
myself yet, and always did. And Polly showed her sense in catering for
a friend's material comforts: it was I who put her into the way of
such good manners--nor do I let her forget them. Polly, offer me a
small slice of that tongue."
"There, papa: but remember you are only waited upon with this
assiduity; on condition of being persuadable, and reconciling yourself
to La Terrasse for the day."
"Mrs. Bretton," said the Count, "I want to get rid of my daughter--to
send her to school. Do you know of any good school?"
"There is Lucy's place--Madame Beck's."
"Miss Snowe is in a school?"
"I am a teacher," I said, and was rather glad of the opportunity of
saying this. For a little while I had been feeling as if placed in a
false position. Mrs. Bretton and son knew my circumstances; but the
Count and his daughter did not. They might choose to vary by some
shades their hitherto cordial manner towards me, when aware of my
grade in society. I spoke then readily: but a swarm of thoughts I had
not anticipated nor invoked, rose dim at the words, making me sigh
involuntarily. Mr. Home did not lift his eyes from his breakfast-plate
for about two minutes, nor did he speak; perhaps he had not caught the
words--perhaps he thought that on a confession of that nature,
politeness would interdict comment: the Scotch are proverbially proud;
and homely as was Mr. Home in look, simple in habits and tastes, I
have all along intimated that he was not without his share of the
national quality. Was his a pseudo pride? was it real dignity? I leave
the question undecided in its wide sense. Where it concerned me
individually I can only answer: then, and always, he showed himself a
true-hearted gentleman.
By nature he was a feeler and a thinker; over his emotions and his
reflections spread a mellowing of melancholy; more than a mellowing:
in trouble and bereavement it became a cloud. He did not know much
about Lucy Snowe; what he knew, he did not very accurately comprehend:
indeed his misconceptions of my character often made me smile; but he
saw my walk in life lay rather on the shady side of the hill: he gave
me credit for doing my endeavour to keep the course honestly straight;
he would have helped me if he could: having no opportunity of helping,
he still wished me well. When he did look at me, his eye was kind;
when he did speak, his voice was benevolent.
"Yours," said he, "is an arduous calling. I wish you health and
strength to win in it--success."
His fair little daughter did not take the information quite so
composedly: she fixed on me a pair of eyes wide with wonder--almost
with dismay.
"Are you a teacher?" cried she. Then, having paused on the unpalatable
idea, "Well, I never knew what you were, nor ever thought of asking:
for me, you were always Lucy Snowe."
"And what am I now?" I could not forbear inquiring.
"Yourself, of course. But do you really teach here, in Villette?"
"I really do."
"And do you like it?"
"Not always."
"And why do you go on with it?"
Her father looked at, and, I feared, was going to check her; but he
only said, "Proceed, Polly, proceed with that catechism--prove
yourself the little wiseacre you are. If Miss Snowe were to blush and
look confused, I should have to bid you hold your tongue; and you and
I would sit out the present meal in some disgrace; but she only
smiles, so push her hard, multiply the cross-questions. Well, Miss
Snowe, why do you go on with it?"
"Chiefly, I fear, for the sake of the money I get."
"Not then from motives of pure philanthropy? Polly and