company with her mother
and some friends; I then glided to the kitchen, begged a bougie for
one half-hour for a particular occasion, found acceptance of my
petition at the hands of my friend Goton, who answered, "Mais
certainement, chou-chou, vous en aurez deux, si vous voulez;" and,
light in hand, I mounted noiseless to the dormitory.
Great was my chagrin to find in that apartment a pupil gone to bed
indisposed,--greater when I recognised, amid the muslin nightcap
borders, the "figure chiffonnee" of Mistress Ginevra Fanshawe; supine
at this moment, it is true--but certain to wake and overwhelm me with
chatter when the interruption would be least acceptable: indeed, as I
watched her, a slight twinkling of the eyelids warned me that the
present appearance of repose might be but a ruse, assumed to cover sly
vigilance over "Timon's" movements; she was not to be trusted. And I
had so wished to be alone, just to read my precious letter in peace.
Well, I must go to the classes. Having sought and found my prize in
its casket, I descended. Ill-luck pursued me. The classes were
undergoing sweeping and purification by candle-light, according to
hebdomadal custom: benches were piled on desks, the air was dim with
dust, damp coffee-grounds (used by Labassecourien housemaids instead
of tea-leaves) darkened the floor; all was hopeless confusion.
Baffled, but not beaten, I withdrew, bent as resolutely as ever on
finding solitude _somewhere_.
Taking a key whereof I knew the repository, I mounted three staircases
in succession, reached a dark, narrow, silent landing, opened a worm-
eaten door, and dived into the deep, black, cold garret. Here none
would follow me--none interrupt--not Madame herself. I shut the
garret-door; I placed my light on a doddered and mouldy chest of
drawers; I put on a shawl, for the air was ice-cold; I took my letter;
trembling with sweet impatience, I broke its seal.
"Will it be long--will it be short?" thought I, passing my hand across
my eyes to dissipate the silvery dimness of a suave, south-wind
shower.
It was long.
"Will it be cool?--will it be kind?"
It was kind.
To my checked, bridled, disciplined expectation, it seemed very kind:
to my longing and famished thought it seemed, perhaps, kinder than it
was.
So little had I hoped, so much had I feared; there was a fulness of
delight in this taste of fruition--such, perhaps, as many a human
being passes through life without ever knowing. The poor English
teacher in the frosty garret, reading by a dim candle guttering in the
wintry air, a letter simply good-natured--nothing more; though that
good-nature then seemed to me godlike--was happier than most queens in
palaces.
Of course, happiness of such shallow origin could be but brief; yet,
while it lasted it was genuine and exquisite: a bubble--but a sweet
bubble--of real honey-dew. Dr. John had written to me at length; he
had written to me with pleasure; he had written with benignant mood,
dwelling with sunny satisfaction on scenes that had passed before his
eyes and mine,--on places we had visited together--on conversations we
had held--on all the little subject-matter, in short, of the last few
halcyon weeks. But the cordial core of the delight was, a conviction
the blithe, genial language generously imparted, that it had been
poured out not merely to content _me_--but to gratify _himself_.
A gratification he might never more desire, never more seek--an
hypothesis in every point of view approaching the certain; but _that_
concerned the future. This present moment had no pain, no blot, no want;
full, pure, perfect, it deeply blessed me. A passing seraph seemed to have
rested beside me, leaned towards my heart, and reposed on its throb a
softening, cooling, healing, hallowing wing. Dr. John, you pained me
afterwards: forgiven be every ill--freely forgiven--for the sake of that
one dear remembered good!
Are there wicked things, not human, which envy human bliss? Are there
evil influences haunting the air, and poisoning it for man? What was
near me?
Something in that vast solitary garret sounded strangely. Most surely
and certainly I heard, as it seemed, a stealthy foot on that floor: a
sort of gliding out from the direction of the black recess haunted by
the malefactor cloaks. I turned: my light was dim; the room was long--
but as I live! I saw in the middle of that ghostly chamber a figure
all black and white; the skirts straight, narrow, black; the head
bandaged, veiled, white.
Say what you will, reader--tell me I was nervous or mad; affirm that I
was unsettled by the excitement of that letter; declare that I
dreamed; this I vow--I saw there--in that room--on that night--an
image like--a NUN.
I cried out; I sickened. Had the shape approached me I might have
swooned. It receded: I made for the door. How I descended all the
stairs I know not. By instinct I shunned the refectory, and shaped my
course to Madame's sitting-room: I burst in. I said--
"There is something in the grenier; I have been there: I saw
something. Go and look at it, all of you!"
I said, "All of you;" for the room seemed to me full of people, though
in truth there were but four present: Madame Beck; her mother, Madame
Kint, who was out of health, and now staying with her on a visit; her
brother, M. Victor Kint, and another gentleman, who, when I entered
the room, was conversing with the old lady, and had his back towards
the door.
My mortal fear and faintness must have made me deadly pale. I felt
cold and shaking. They all rose in consternation; they surrounded me.
I urged them to go to the grenier; the sight of the gentlemen did me
good and gave me courage: it seemed as if there were some help and
hope, with men at hand. I turned to the door, beckoning them to
follow. They wanted to stop me, but I said they must come this way:
they must see what I had seen---something strange, standing in the
middle of the garret. And, now, I remembered my letter, left on the
drawers with the light. This precious letter! Flesh or spirit must be
defied for its sake. I flew up-stairs, hastening the faster as I knew
I was followed: they were obliged to come.
Lo! when I reached the garret-door, all within was dark as a pit: the
light was out. Happily some one--Madame, I think, with her usual calm
sense--had brought a lamp from the room; speedily, therefore, as they
came up, a ray