him, I'd not condescend to get out of his way, or to
forge a smile or a cheerful word wherewith to avert his sarcasm."
Then I recurred to the other letter: that struck a chord whose sound I
could not deaden by thrusting my fingers into my ears, for it vibrated
within; and though its swell might be exquisite music, its cadence was a
groan.
That Frances was relieved from the pressure of want, that the curse of
excessive labour was taken off her, filled me with happiness; that her
first thought in prosperity should be to augment her joy by sharing
it with me, met and satisfied the wish of my heart. Two results of her
letter were then pleasant, sweet as two draughts of nectar; but applying
my lips for the third time to the cup, and they were excoriated as with
vinegar and gall.
Two persons whose desires are moderate may live well enough in Brussels
on an income which would scarcely afford a respectable maintenance for
one in London: and that, not because the necessaries of life are so
much dearer in the latter capital, or taxes so much higher than in the
former, but because the English surpass in folly all the nations on
God's earth, and are more abject slaves to custom, to opinion, to
the desire to keep up a certain appearance, than the Italians are to
priestcraft, the French to vain-glory, the Russians to their Czar, or
the Germans to black beer. I have seen a degree of sense in the modest
arrangement of one homely Belgian household, that might put to shame the
elegance, the superfluities, the luxuries, the strained refinements of
a hundred genteel English mansions. In Belgium, provided you can
make money, you may save it; this is scarcely possible in England;
ostentation there lavishes in a month what industry has earned in a
year. More shame to all classes in that most bountiful and beggarly
country for their servile following of Fashion; I could write a chapter
or two on this subject, but must forbear, at least for the present. Had
I retained my 60l. per annum I could, now that Frances was in possession
of 50l., have gone straight to her this very evening, and spoken out the
words which, repressed, kept fretting my heart with fever; our united
income would, as we should have managed it, have sufficed well for
our mutual support; since we lived in a country where economy was not
confounded with meanness, where frugality in dress, food, and furniture,
was not synonymous with vulgarity in these various points. But the
placeless usher, bare of resource, and unsupported by connections, must
not think of this; such a sentiment as love, such a word as marriage,
were misplaced in his heart, and on his lips. Now for the first time did
I truly feel what it was to be poor; now did the sacrifice I had made
in casting from me the means of living put on a new aspect; instead of
a correct, just, honourable act, it seemed a deed at once light and
fanatical; I took several turns in my room, under the goading influence
of most poignant remorse; I walked a quarter of an hour from the wall to
the window; and at the window, self-reproach seemed to face me; at the
wall, self-disdain: all at once out spoke Conscience:--
"Down, stupid tormenters!" cried she; "the man has done his duty;
you shall not bait him thus by thoughts of what might have been; he
relinquished a temporary and contingent good to avoid a permanent and
certain evil he did well. Let him reflect now, and when your blinding
dust and deafening hum subside, he will discover a path."
I sat down; I propped my forehead on both my hands; I thought and
thought an hour-two hours; vainly. I seemed like one sealed in a
subterranean vault, who gazes at utter blackness; at blackness ensured
by yard-thick stone walls around, and by piles of building above,
expecting light to penetrate through granite, and through cement firm
as granite. But there are chinks, or there may be chinks, in the
best adjusted masonry; there was a chink in my cavernous cell; for,
eventually, I saw, or seemed to see, a ray--pallid, indeed, and cold,
and doubtful, but still a ray, for it showed that narrow path which
conscience had promised after two, three hours' torturing research in
brain and memory, I disinterred certain remains of circumstances, and
conceived a hope that by putting them together an expedient might be
framed, and a resource discovered. The circumstances were briefly these:
Some three months ago M. Pelet had, on the occasion of his fete, given
the boys a treat, which treat consisted in a party of pleasure to a
certain place of public resort in the outskirts of Brussels, of which
I do not at this moment remember the name, but near it were several of
those lakelets called etangs; and there was one etang, larger than the
rest, where on holidays people were accustomed to amuse themselves by
rowing round it in little boats. The boys having eaten an unlimited
quantity of "gaufres," and drank several bottles of Louvain beer, amid
the shades of a garden made and provided for such crams, petitioned
the director for leave to take a row on the etang. Half a dozen of the
eldest succeeded in obtaining leave, and I was commissioned to accompany
them as surveillant. Among the half dozen happened to be a certain Jean
Baptiste Vandenhuten, a most ponderous young Flamand, not tall, but
even now, at the early age of sixteen, possessing a breadth and depth of
personal development truly national. It chanced that Jean was the first
lad to step into the boat; he stumbled, rolled to one side, the boat
revolted at his weight and capsized. Vandenhuten sank like lead, rose,
sank again. My coat and waistcoat were off in an instant; I had not been
brought up at Eton and boated and bathed and swam there ten long years
for nothing; it was a natural and easy act for me to leap to the rescue.
The lads and the boatmen yelled; they thought there would be two deaths
by drowning instead of one; but as Jean rose the third time, I clutched
him by one leg and the collar, and in three minutes more both he and I
were safe landed. To speak heaven's truth, my merit in