tapped at the door. She started up.
"I am dressed, Harriet," said she; "I have dressed myself, but I do
not feel neat. Make me neat!"
"Why did you dress yourself, Missy?"
"Hush! speak low, Harriet, for fear of waking _the girl_"
(meaning me, who now lay with my eyes shut). "I dressed myself to
learn, against the time you leave me."
"Do you want me to go?"
"When you are cross, I have many a time wanted you to go, but not now.
Tie my sash straight; make my hair smooth, please."
"Your sash is straight enough. What a particular little body you are!"
"It must be tied again. Please to tie it."
"There, then. When I am gone you must get that young lady to dress
you."
"On no account."
"Why? She is a very nice young lady. I hope you mean to behave
prettily to her, Missy, and not show your airs."
"She shall dress me on no account."
"Comical little thing!"
"You are not passing the comb straight through my hair, Harriet; the
line will be crooked."
"Ay, you are ill to please. Does that suit?"
"Pretty well. Where should I go now that I am dressed?"
"I will take you into the breakfast-room."
"Come, then."
They proceeded to the door. She stopped.
"Oh! Harriet, I wish this was papa's house! I don't know these
people."
"Be a good child, Missy."
"I am good, but I ache here;" putting her hand to her heart, and
moaning while she reiterated, "Papa! papa!"
I roused myself and started up, to check this scene while it was yet
within bounds.
"Say good-morning to the young lady," dictated Harriet. She said,
"Good-morning," and then followed her nurse from the room. Harriet
temporarily left that same day, to go to her own friends, who lived in
the neighbourhood.
On descending, I found Paulina (the child called herself Polly, but
her full name was Paulina Mary) seated at the breakfast-table, by Mrs.
Bretton's side; a mug of milk stood before her, a morsel of bread
filled her hand, which lay passive on the table-cloth: she was not
eating.
"How we shall conciliate this little creature," said Mrs. Bretton to
me, "I don't know: she tastes nothing, and by her looks, she has not
slept."
I expressed my confidence in the effects of time and kindness.
"If she were to take a fancy to anybody in the house, she would soon
settle; but not till then," replied Mrs. Bretton.
CHAPTER II.
PAULINA.
Some days elapsed, and it appeared she was not likely to take much of
a fancy to anybody in the house. She was not exactly naughty or
wilful: she was far from disobedient; but an object less conducive to
comfort--to tranquillity even--than she presented, it was scarcely
possible to have before one's eyes. She moped: no grown person could
have performed that uncheering business better; no furrowed face of
adult exile, longing for Europe at Europe's antipodes, ever bore more
legibly the signs of home sickness than did her infant visage. She
seemed growing old and unearthly. I, Lucy Snowe, plead guiltless of
that curse, an overheated and discursive imagination; but whenever,
opening a room-door, I found her seated in a corner alone, her head in
her pigmy hand, that room seemed to me not inhabited, but haunted.
And again, when of moonlight nights, on waking, I beheld her figure,
white and conspicuous in its night-dress, kneeling upright in bed, and
praying like some Catholic or Methodist enthusiast--some precocious
fanatic or untimely saint--I scarcely know what thoughts I had; but
they ran risk of being hardly more rational and healthy than that
child's mind must have been.
I seldom caught a word of her prayers, for they were whispered low:
sometimes, indeed, they were not whispered at all, but put up
unuttered; such rare sentences as reached my ear still bore the
burden, "Papa; my dear papa!" This, I perceived, was a one-idea'd
nature; betraying that monomaniac tendency I have ever thought the
most unfortunate with which man or woman can be cursed.
What might have been the end of this fretting, had it continued
unchecked, can only be conjectured: it received, however, a sudden
turn.
One afternoon, Mrs. Bretton, coaxing her from her usual station
in a corner, had lifted her into the window-seat, and, by way of
occupying her attention, told her to watch the passengers and count
how many ladies should go down the street in a given time. She
had sat listlessly, hardly looking, and not counting, when--my eye
being fixed on hers--I witnessed in its iris and pupil a startling
transfiguration. These sudden, dangerous natures--_sensitive_ as
they are called--offer many a curious spectacle to those whom a cooler
temperament has secured from participation in their angular vagaries.
The fixed and heavy gaze swum, trembled, then glittered in fire; the
small, overcast brow cleared; the trivial and dejected features lit
up; the sad countenance vanished, and in its place appeared a sudden
eagerness, an intense expectancy. "It _is_!" were her words.
Like a bird or a shaft, or any other swift thing, she was gone from
the room, How she got the house-door open I cannot tell; probably it
might be ajar; perhaps Warren was in the way and obeyed her behest,
which would be impetuous enough. I--watching calmly from the window--
saw her, in her black frock and tiny braided apron (to pinafores she
had an antipathy), dart half the length of the street; and, as I was
on the point of turning, and quietly announcing to Mrs. Bretton that
the child was run out mad, and ought instantly to be pursued, I saw
her caught up, and rapt at once from my cool observation, and from the
wondering stare of the passengers. A gentleman had done this good
turn, and now, covering her with his cloak, advanced to restore her to
the house whence he had seen her issue.
I concluded he would leave her in a servant's charge and withdraw; but
he entered: having tarried a little while below, he came up-stairs.
His reception immediately explained that he was known to Mrs. Bretton.
She recognised him; she greeted him, and yet she was fluttered,
surprised, taken unawares. Her look and manner were even
expostulatory; and in reply to these, rather than her words, he said,
--"I could not help it, madam: I found it impossible to leave the
country without seeing with my own eyes how she settled."
"But you will unsettle her."
"I hope not. And how is papa's little Polly?"
This question he addressed to Paulina, as he sat down and placed her
gently on