don't very well understand these matters; but I believe you
are doing very wrong--seriously wrong. Perhaps, however, you now feel
certain that you will be able to marry M. Isidore; your parents and
uncle have given their consent, and, for your part, you love him
entirely?"
"Mais pas du tout!" (she always had recourse to French when about to
say something specially heartless and perverse). "Je suis sa reine,
mais il n'est pas mon roi."
"Excuse me, I must believe this language is mere nonsense and
coquetry. There is nothing great about you, yet you are above
profiting by the good nature and purse of a man to whom you feel
absolute indifference. You love M. Isidore far more than you think, or
will avow."
"No. I danced with a young officer the other night, whom I love a
thousand times more than he. I often wonder why I feel so very cold to
Isidore, for everybody says he is handsome, and other ladies admire
him; but, somehow, he bores me: let me see now how it is...."
And she seemed to make an effort to reflect. In this I encouraged her.
"Yes!" I said, "try to get a clear idea of the state of your mind. To
me it seems in a great mess--chaotic as a rag-bag."
"It is something in this fashion," she cried out ere long: "the man is
too romantic and devoted, and he expects something more of me than I
find it convenient to be. He thinks I am perfect: furnished with all
sorts of sterling qualities and solid virtues, such as I never had,
nor intend to have. Now, one can't help, in his presence, rather
trying to justify his good opinion; and it does so tire one to be
goody, and to talk sense,--for he really thinks I am sensible. I am
far more at my ease with you, old lady--you, you dear crosspatch--who
take me at my lowest, and know me to be coquettish, and ignorant, and
flirting, and fickle, and silly, and selfish, and all the other sweet
things you and I have agreed to be a part of my character."
"This is all very well," I said, making a strenuous effort to preserve
that gravity and severity which ran risk of being shaken by this
whimsical candour, "but it does not alter that wretched business of
the presents. Pack them up, Ginevra, like a good, honest girl, and
send them back."
"Indeed, I won't," said she, stoutly.
"Then you are deceiving M. Isidore. It stands to reason that by
accepting his presents you give him to understand he will one day
receive an equivalent, in your regard..."
"But he won't," she interrupted: "he has his equivalent now, in the
pleasure of seeing me wear them--quite enough for him: he is only
bourgeois."
This phrase, in its senseless arrogance, quite cured me of the
temporary weakness which had made me relax my tone and aspect. She
rattled on:
"My present business is to enjoy youth, and not to think of fettering
myself, by promise or vow, to this man or that. When first I saw
Isidore, I believed he would help me to enjoy it I believed he would
be content with my being a pretty girl; and that we should meet and
part and flutter about like two butterflies, and be happy. Lo, and
behold! I find him at times as grave as a judge, and deep-feeling and
thoughtful. Bah! Les penseurs, les hommes profonds et passionnes ne
sont pas a mon gout. Le Colonel Alfred de Hamal suits me far better.
Va pour les beaux fats et les jolis fripons! Vive les joies et les
plaisirs! A bas les grandes passions et les severes vertus!"
She looked for an answer to this tirade. I gave none.
"J'aime mon beau Colonel," she went on: "je n'aimerai jamais son
rival. Je ne serai jamais femme de bourgeois, moi!"
I now signified that it was imperatively necessary my apartment should
be relieved of the honour of her presence: she went away laughing.
CHAPTER X.
DR JOHN.
Madame Beck was a most consistent character; forbearing with all the
world, and tender to no part of it. Her own children drew her into no
deviation from the even tenor of her stoic calm. She was solicitous
about her family, vigilant for their interests and physical well-
being; but she never seemed to know the wish to take her little
children upon her lap, to press their rosy lips with her own, to
gather them in a genial embrace, to shower on them softly the
benignant caress, the loving word.
I have watched her sometimes sitting in the garden, viewing the little
bees afar off, as they walked in a distant alley with Trinette, their
_bonne_; in her mien spoke care and prudence. I know she often
pondered anxiously what she called "leur avenir;" but if the youngest,
a puny and delicate but engaging child, chancing to spy her, broke
from its nurse, and toddling down the walk, came all eager and
laughing and panting to clasp her knee, Madame would just calmly put
out one hand, so as to prevent inconvenient concussion from the
child's sudden onset: "Prends garde, mon enfant!" she would say
unmoved, patiently permit it to stand near her a few moments, and
then, without smile or kiss, or endearing syllable, rise and lead it
back to Trinette.
Her demeanour to the eldest girl was equally characteristic in another
way. This was a vicious child. "Quelle peste que cette Desiree! Quel
poison que cet enfant la!" were the expressions dedicated to her,
alike in kitchen and in schoolroom. Amongst her other endowments she
boasted an exquisite skill in the art, of provocation, sometimes
driving her _bonne_ and the servants almost wild. She would steal
to their attics, open their drawers and boxes, wantonly tear their
best caps and soil their best shawls; she would watch her opportunity
to get at the buffet of the salle-a-manger, where she would smash
articles of porcelain or glass--or to the cupboard of the storeroom,
where she would plunder the preserves, drink the sweet wine, break
jars and bottles, and so contrive as to throw the onus of suspicion on
the cook and the kitchen-maid. All this when Madame saw, and of which
when she received report, her sole observation, uttered with matchless
serenity, was:
"Desiree a besoin d'une surveillance toute particuliere." Accordingly
she kept this promising olive-branch a good deal at her side. Never
once, I believe, did she tell her faithfully of her faults,