had taken in the faubourg nearest to that part of the city where the
scene of our avocations lay.
Three or four hours after the wedding ceremony, Frances, divested of her
bridal snow, and attired in a pretty lilac gown of warmer materials,
a piquant black silk apron, and a lace collar with some finishing
decoration of lilac ribbon, was kneeling on the carpet of a neatly
furnished though not spacious parlour, arranging on the shelves of a
chiffoniere some books, which I handed to her from the table. It was
snowing fast out of doors; the afternoon had turned out wild and
cold; the leaden sky seemed full of drifts, and the street was already
ankle-deep in the white downfall. Our fire burned bright, our new
habitation looked brilliantly clean and fresh, the furniture was all
arranged, and there were but some articles of glass, china, books,
&c., to put in order. Frances found in this business occupation till
tea-time, and then, after I had distinctly instructed her how to make
a cup of tea in rational English style, and after she had got over the
dismay occasioned by seeing such an extravagant amount of material put
into the pot, she administered to me a proper British repast, at which
there wanted neither candies nor urn, fire-light nor comfort.
Our week's holiday glided by, and we readdressed ourselves to labour.
Both my wife and I began in good earnest with the notion that we were
working people, destined to earn our bread by exertion, and that of the
most assiduous kind. Our days were thoroughly occupied; we used to part
every morning at eight o'clock, and not meet again till five P.M.; but
into what sweet rest did the turmoil of each busy day decline! Looking
down the vista, of memory, I see the evenings passed in that little
parlour like a long string of rubies circling the dusk brow of the past.
Unvaried were they as each cut gem, and like each gem brilliant and
burning.
A year and a half passed. One morning (it was a FETE, and we had the day
to ourselves) Frances said to me, with a suddenness peculiar to her when
she had been thinking long on a subject, and at last, having come to
a conclusion, wished to test its soundness by the touchstone of my
judgment:--
"I don't work enough."
"What now?" demanded I, looking up from my coffee, which I had been
deliberately stirring while enjoying, in anticipation, a walk I proposed
to take with Frances, that fine summer day (it was June), to a certain
farmhouse in the country, where we were to dine. "What now?" and I
saw at once, in the serious ardour of her face, a project of vital
importance.
"I am not satisfied" returned she: "you are now earning eight thousand
francs a year" (it was true; my efforts, punctuality, the fame of my
pupils' progress, the publicity of my station, had so far helped me
on), "while I am still at my miserable twelve hundred francs. I CAN do
better, and I WILL."
"You work as long and as diligently as I do, Frances."
"Yes, monsieur, but I am not working in the right way, and I am
convinced of it."
"You wish to change--you have a plan for progress in your mind; go and
put on your bonnet; and, while we take our walk, you shall tell me of
it."
"Yes, monsieur."
She went--as docile as a well-trained child; she was a curious mixture
of tractability and firmness: I sat thinking about her, and wondering
what her plan could be, when she re-entered.
"Monsieur, I have given Minnie" (our bonne) "leave to go out too, as it
is so very fine; so will you be kind enough to lock the door, and take
the key with you?"
"Kiss me, Mrs. Crimsworth," was my not very apposite reply; but she
looked so engaging in her light summer dress and little cottage bonnet,
and her manner in speaking to me was then, as always, so unaffectedly
and suavely respectful, that my heart expanded at the sight of her, and
a kiss seemed necessary to content its importunity.
"There, monsieur."
"Why do you always call me 'Monsieur?' Say, 'William.'"
"I cannot pronounce your W; besides, 'Monsieur' belongs to you; I like
it best."
Minnie having departed in clean cap and smart shawl, we, too, set out,
leaving the house solitary and silent--silent, at least, but for
the ticking of the clock. We were soon clear of Brussels; the fields
received us, and then the lanes, remote from carriage-resounding
CHAUSSEES. Ere long we came upon a nook, so rural, green, and secluded,
it might have been a spot in some pastoral English province; a bank of
short and mossy grass, under a hawthorn, offered a seat too tempting
to be declined; we took it, and when we had admired and examined some
English-looking wild-flowers growing at our feet, I recalled Frances'
attention and my own to the topic touched on at breakfast.
"What was her plan?" A natural one--the next step to be mounted by
us, or, at least, by her, if she wanted to rise in her profession. She
proposed to begin a school. We already had the means for commencing on
a careful scale, having lived greatly within our income. We possessed,
too, by this time, an extensive and eligible connection, in the sense
advantageous to our business; for, though our circle of visiting
acquaintance continued as limited as ever, we were now widely known in
schools and families as teachers. When Frances had developed her plan,
she intimated, in some closing sentences, her hopes for the future. If
we only had good health and tolerable success, me might, she was sure,
in time realize an independency; and that, perhaps, before we were too
old to enjoy it; then both she and I would rest; and what was to hinder
us from going to live in England? England was still her Promised Land.
I put no obstacle in her way; raised no objection; I knew she was
not one who could live quiescent and inactive, or even comparatively
inactive. Duties she must have to fulfil, and important duties; work to
do--and exciting, absorbing, profitable work; strong faculties stirred
in her frame, and they demanded full nourishment, free exercise: mine
was not the hand ever to starve or cramp them; no, I delighted in
offering them sustenance, and in clearing them wider space for action.
"You have conceived a plan, Frances," said I, "and