the louder. She seemed quite bent upon having the
glass door opened. Tired, I suppose, with her importunity, he threw
down his spade, approached, and pushed the door ajar. Sylvie burst in
all impetuous, sprang to my lap, and with her paws at my neck, and her
little nose and tongue somewhat overpoweringly busy about my face,
mouth, and eyes, flourished her bushy tail over the desk, and
scattered books and papers far and wide.
M. Emanuel advanced to still the clamour and repair the
disarrangement. Having gathered up the books, he captured Sylvie, and
stowed her away under his paletot, where she nestled as quiet as a
mouse, her head just peeping forth. She was very tiny, and had the
prettiest little innocent face, the silkiest long ears, the finest
dark eyes in the world. I never saw her, but I thought of Paulina de
Bassompierre: forgive the association, reader, it _would_ occur.
M. Paul petted and patted her; the endearments she received were not
to be wondered at; she invited affection by her beauty and her
vivacious life.
While caressing the spaniel, his eye roved over the papers and books
just replaced; it settled on the religious tract. His lips moved; he
half checked the impulse to speak. What! had he promised never to
address me more? If so, his better nature pronounced the vow "more
honoured in the breach than in the observance," for with a second
effort, he spoke.--"You have not yet read the brochure, I presume? It
is not sufficiently inviting?"
I replied that I had read it.
He waited, as if wishing me to give an opinion upon it unasked.
Unasked, however, I was in no mood to do or say anything. If any
concessions were to be made--if any advances were demanded--that was
the affair of the very docile pupil of Pere Silas, not mine. His eye
settled upon me gently: there was mildness at the moment in its blue
ray--there was solicitude--a shade of pathos; there were meanings
composite and contrasted--reproach melting into remorse. At the moment
probably, he would have been glad to see something emotional in me. I
could not show it. In another minute, however, I should have betrayed
confusion, had I not bethought myself to take some quill-pens from my
desk, and begin soberly to mend them.
I knew that action would give a turn to his mood. He never liked to
see me mend pens; my knife was always dull-edged--my hand, too, was
unskilful; I hacked and chipped. On this occasion I cut my own finger
--half on purpose. I wanted to restore him to his natural state, to set
him at his ease, to get him to chide.
"Maladroit!" he cried at last, "she will make mincemeat of her hands."
He put Sylvie down, making her lie quiet beside his bonnet-grec, and,
depriving me of the pens and penknife, proceeded to slice, nib, and
point with the accuracy and celerity of a machine.
"Did I like the little book?" he now inquired.
Suppressing a yawn, I said I hardly knew.
"Had it moved me?"
"I thought it had made me a little sleepy."
(After a pause:) "Allons donc! It was of no use taking that tone with
him. Bad as I was--and he should be sorry to have to name all my
faults at a breath--God and nature had given me 'trop de sensibilite
et de sympathie' not to be profoundly affected by an appeal so
touching."
"Indeed!" I responded, rousing myself quickly, "I was not affected at
all--not a whit."
And in proof, I drew from my pocket a perfectly dry handkerchief,
still clean and in its folds.
Hereupon I was made the object of a string of strictures rather
piquant than polite. I listened with zest. After those two days of
unnatural silence, it was better than music to hear M. Paul haranguing
again just in his old fashion. I listened, and meantime solaced myself
and Sylvie with the contents of a bonbonniere, which M. Emanuel's
gifts kept well supplied with chocolate comfits: It pleased him to see
even a small matter from his hand duly appreciated. He looked at me
and the spaniel while we shared the spoil; he put up his penknife.
Touching my hand with the bundle of new-cut quills, he said:--"Dites
donc, petite soeur--speak frankly--what have you thought of me during
the last two days?"
But of this question I would take no manner of notice; its purport
made my eyes fill. I caressed Sylvie assiduously. M. Paul, leaning--
over the desk, bent towards me:--"I called myself your brother," he
said: "I hardly know what I am--brother--friend--I cannot tell. I know
I think of you--I feel I wish, you well--but I must check myself; you
are to be feared. My best friends point out danger, and whisper
caution."
"You do right to listen to your friends. By all means be cautious."
"It is your religion--your strange, self-reliant, invulnerable creed,
whose influence seems to clothe you in, I know not what, unblessed
panoply. You are good--Pere Silas calls you good, and loves you--but
your terrible, proud, earnest Protestantism, there is the danger. It
expresses itself by your eye at times; and again, it gives you certain
tones and certain gestures that make my flesh creep. You are not
demonstrative, and yet, just now--when you handled that tract--my God!
I thought Lucifer smiled."
"Certainly I don't respect that tract--what then?"
"Not respect that tract? But it is the pure essence of faith, love,
charity! I thought it would touch you: in its gentleness, I trusted
that it could not fail. I laid it in your desk with a prayer: I must
indeed be a sinner: Heaven will not hear the petitions that come
warmest from my heart. You scorn my little offering. Oh, cela me fait
mal!"
"Monsieur, I don't scorn it--at least, not as your gift. Monsieur, sit
down; listen to me. I am not a heathen, I am not hard-hearted, I am
not unchristian, I am not dangerous, as they tell you; I would not
trouble your faith; you believe in God and Christ and the Bible, and
so do I."
"But _do_ you believe in the Bible? Do you receive Revelation?
What limits are there to the wild, careless daring of your country and
sect. Pere Silas dropped dark hints."
By dint of persuasion, I made him half-define these hints; they
amounted to crafty Jesuit-slanders. That night M. Paul and I talked
seriously and closely. He pleaded, he argued. _I_ could not
argue--a fortunate incapacity; it needed but triumphant, logical
opposition to effect