a figment. When the world was younger
and haler than now, moral trials were a deeper mystery still: perhaps
in all the land of Israel there was but one Saul--certainly but one
David to soothe or comprehend him.
The keen, still cold of the morning was succeeded, later in the day,
by a sharp breathing from Russian wastes: the cold zone sighed over
the temperate zone, and froze it fast. A heavy firmament, dull, and
thick with snow, sailed up from the north, and settled over expectant
Europe. Towards afternoon began the descent. I feared no carriage
would come, the white tempest raged so dense and wild. But trust my
godmother! Once having asked, she would have her guest. About six
o'clock I was lifted from the carriage over the already blocked-up
front steps of the chateau, and put in at the door of La Terrasse.
Running through the vestibule, and up-stairs to the drawing-room,
there I found Mrs. Bretton--a summer-day in her own person. Had I been
twice as cold as I was, her kind kiss and cordial clasp would have
warmed me. Inured now for so long a time to rooms with bare boards,
black benches, desks, and stoves, the blue saloon seemed to me
gorgeous. In its Christmas-like fire alone there was a clear and
crimson splendour which quite dazzled me.
When my godmother had held my hand for a little while, and chatted
with me, and scolded me for having become thinner than when she last
saw me, she professed to discover that the snow-wind had disordered my
hair, and sent me up-stairs to make it neat and remove my shawl.
Repairing to my own little sea-green room, there also I found a bright
fire, and candles too were lit: a tall waxlight stood on each side the
great looking glass; but between the candles, and before the glass,
appeared something dressing itself--an airy, fairy thing--small,
slight, white--a winter spirit.
I declare, for one moment I thought of Graham and his spectral
illusions. With distrustful eye I noted the details of this new
vision. It wore white, sprinkled slightly with drops of scarlet; its
girdle was red; it had something in its hair leafy, yet shining--a
little wreath with an evergreen gloss. Spectral or not, here truly was
nothing frightful, and I advanced.
Turning quick upon me, a large eye, under long lashes, flashed over
me, the intruder: the lashes were as dark as long, and they softened
with their pencilling the orb they guarded.
"Ah! you are come!" she breathed out, in a soft, quiet voice, and she
smiled slowly, and gazed intently.
I knew her now. Having only once seen that sort of face, with that
cast of fine and delicate featuring, I could not but know her.
"Miss de Bassompierre," I pronounced.
"No," was the reply, "not Miss de Bassompierre for _you!_" I did
not inquire who then she might be, but waited voluntary information.
"You are changed, but still you are yourself," she said, approaching
nearer. "I remember you well--your countenance, the colour of your
hair, the outline of your face...."
I had moved to the fire, and she stood opposite, and gazed into me;
and as she gazed, her face became gradually more and more expressive
of thought and feeling, till at last a dimness quenched her clear
vision.
"It makes me almost cry to look so far back," said she: "but as to
being sorry, or sentimental, don't think it: on the contrary, I am
quite pleased and glad."
Interested, yet altogether at fault, I knew not what to say. At last I
stammered, "I think I never met you till that night, some weeks ago,
when you were hurt...?"
She smiled. "You have forgotten then that I have sat on your knee,
been lifted in your arms, even shared your pillow? You no longer
remember the night when I came crying, like a naughty little child as
I was, to your bedside, and you took me in. You have no memory for the
comfort and protection by which you soothed an acute distress? Go back
to Bretton. Remember Mr. Home."
At last I saw it all. "And you are little Polly?"
"I am Paulina Mary Home de Bassompierre."
How time can change! Little Polly wore in her pale, small features,
her fairy symmetry, her varying expression, a certain promise of
interest and grace; but Paulina Mary was become beautiful--not with
the beauty that strikes the eye like a rose--orbed, ruddy, and
replete; not with the plump, and pink, and flaxen attributes of her
blond cousin Ginevra; but her seventeen years had brought her a
refined and tender charm which did not lie in complexion, though hers
was fair and clear; nor in outline, though her features were sweet,
and her limbs perfectly turned; but, I think, rather in a subdued glow
from the soul outward. This was not an opaque vase, of material
however costly, but a lamp chastely lucent, guarding from extinction,
yet not hiding from worship, a flame vital and vestal. In speaking of
her attractions, I would not exaggerate language; but, indeed, they
seemed to me very real and engaging. What though all was on a small
scale, it was the perfume which gave this white violet distinction,
and made it superior to the broadest camelia--the fullest dahlia that
ever bloomed.
"Ah! and you remember the old time at Bretton?"
"Better," said she, "better, perhaps, than you. I remember it with
minute distinctness: not only the time, but the days of the time, and
the hours of the days."
"You must have forgotten some things?"
"Very little, I imagine."
"You were then a little creature of quick feelings: you must, long ere
this, have outgrown the impressions with which joy and grief,
affection and bereavement, stamped your mind ten years ago."
"You think I have forgotten whom I liked, and in what degree I liked
them when a child?"
"The sharpness must be gone--the point, the poignancy--the deep
imprint must be softened away and effaced?"
"I have a good memory for those days."
She looked as if she had. Her eyes were the eyes of one who can
remember; one whose childhood does not fade like a dream, nor whose
youth vanish like a sunbeam. She would not take life, loosely and
incoherently, in parts, and let one season slip as she entered on
another: she would retain and add; often review from the commencement,
and so grow in harmony and consistency as she grew in years. Still I
could not quite admit the conviction that _all_ the pictures
which