so I began:
"Mademoiselle Henri has left your establishment--been dismissed, I
presume?"
"Ah, I wished to have a little conversation with you, monsieur," replied
the directress with the most natural and affable air in the world;
"but we cannot talk quietly here; will Monsieur step into the garden a
minute?" And she preceded me, stepping out through the glass-door I have
before mentioned.
"There," said she, when we had reached the centre of the middle alley,
and when the foliage of shrubs and trees, now in their summer pride,
closing behind end around us, shut out the view of the house, and thus
imparted a sense of seclusion even to this little plot of ground in the
very core of a capital.
"There, one feels quiet and free when there are only pear-trees and
rose-bushes about one; I dare say you, like me, monsieur, are sometimes
tired of being eternally in the midst of life; of having human faces
always round you, human eyes always upon you, human voices always in
your ear. I am sure I often wish intensely for liberty to spend a whole
month in the country at some little farm-house, bien gentille, bien
propre, tout entouree de champs et de bois; quelle vie charmante que la
vie champetre! N'est-ce pas, monsieur?"
"Cela depend, mademoiselle."
"Que le vent est bon et frais!" continued the directress; and she was
right there, for it was a south wind, soft and sweet. I carried my hat
in my hand, and this gentle breeze, passing through my hair, soothed my
temples like balm. Its refreshing effect, however, penetrated no deeper
than the mere surface of the frame; for as I walked by the side of
Mdlle. Reuter, my heart was still hot within me, and while I was musing
the fire burned; then spake I with my tongue:--
"I understand Mdlle. Henri is gone from hence, and will not return?"
"Ah, true! I meant to have named the subject to you some days ago, but
my time is so completely taken up, I cannot do half the things I wish:
have you never experienced what it is, monsieur, to find the day too
short by twelve hours for your numerous duties?"
"Not often. Mdlle. Henri's departure was not voluntary, I presume? If it
had been, she would certainly have given me some intimation of it, being
my pupil."
"Oh, did she not tell you? that was strange; for my part, I never
thought of adverting to the subject; when one has so many things to
attend to, one is apt to forget little incidents that are not of primary
importance."
"You consider Mdlle. Henri's dismission, then, as a very insignificant
event?"
"Dismission? Ah! she was not dismissed; I can say with truth, monsieur,
that since I became the head of this establishment no master or teacher
has ever been dismissed from it."
"Yet some have left it, mademoiselle?"
"Many; I have found it necessary to change frequently--a change of
instructors is often beneficial to the interests of a school; it gives
life and variety to the proceedings; it amuses the pupils, and suggests
to the parents the idea of exertion and progress."
"Yet when you are tired of a professor or maitresse, you scruple to
dismiss them?"
"No need to have recourse to such extreme measures, I assure you.
Allons, monsieur le professeur--asseyons-nous; je vais vous donner une
petite lecon dans votre etat d'instituteur." (I wish I might write
all she said to me in French--it loses sadly by being translated into
English.) We had now reached THE garden-chair; the directress sat down,
and signed to me to sit by her, but I only rested my knee on the seat,
and stood leaning my head and arm against the embowering branch of a
huge laburnum, whose golden flowers, blent with the dusky green leaves
of a lilac-bush, formed a mixed arch of shade and sunshine over the
retreat. Mdlle. Reuter sat silent a moment; some novel movements were
evidently working in her mind, and they showed their nature on her
astute brow; she was meditating some CHEF D'OEUVRE of policy. Convinced
by several months' experience that the affectation of virtues she did
not possess was unavailing to ensnare me--aware that I had read her real
nature, and would believe nothing of the character she gave out as being
hers--she had determined, at last, to try a new key, and see if the lock
of my heart would yield to that; a little audacity, a word of truth, a
glimpse of the real. "Yes, I will try," was her inward resolve; and then
her blue eye glittered upon me--it did not flash--nothing of flame ever
kindled in its temperate gleam.
"Monsieur fears to sit by me?" she inquired playfully.
"I have no wish to usurp Pelet's place," I answered, for I had got the
habit of speaking to her bluntly--a habit begun in anger, but continued
because I saw that, instead of offending, it fascinated her. She cast
down her eyes, and drooped her eyelids; she sighed uneasily; she turned
with an anxious gesture, as if she would give me the idea of a bird that
flutters in its cage, and would fain fly from its jail and jailer, and
seek its natural mate and pleasant nest.
"Well--and your lesson?" I demanded briefly.
"Ah!" she exclaimed, recovering herself, "you are so young, so frank
and fearless, so talented, so impatient of imbecility, so disdainful of
vulgarity, you need a lesson; here it is then: far more is to be done
in this world by dexterity than by strength; but, perhaps, you knew
that before, for there is delicacy as well as power in your
character--policy, as well as pride?"
"Go on," said I; and I could hardly help smiling, the flattery was so
piquant, so finely seasoned. She caught the prohibited smile, though I
passed my hand over my month to conceal it; and again she made room for
me to sit beside her. I shook my head, though temptation penetrated to
my senses at the moment, and once more I told her to go on.
"Well, then, if ever you are at the head of a large establishment,
dismiss nobody. To speak truth, monsieur (and to you I will speak
truth), I despise people who are always making rows, blustering, sending
off one to the right, and another to the left, urging and hurrying
circumstances. I'll tell you what I like best to do, monsieur, shall I?"
She looked up again; she had compounded her glance well this time--much
archness,