that one it must come. He remembered
me yet. How deep a pulse of gratitude sent new life through my heart.
Drawing near, bending and looking on the letter, in trembling but
almost certain hope of seeing a known hand, it was my lot to find, on
the contrary, an autograph for the moment deemed unknown--a pale
female scrawl, instead of a firm, masculine character. I then thought
fate was _too_ hard for me, and I said, audibly, "This is cruel."
But I got over that pain also. Life is still life, whatever its pangs:
our eyes and ears and their use remain with us, though the prospect of
what pleases be wholly withdrawn, and the sound of what consoles be
quite silenced.
I opened the billet: by this time I had recognised its handwriting as
perfectly familiar. It was dated "La Terrasse," and it ran thus:--
"DEAR LUCY,--It occurs to me to inquire what you have been doing with
yourself for the last month or two? Not that I suspect you would have
the least difficulty in giving an account of your proceedings. I
daresay you have been just as busy and as happy as ourselves at La
Terrasse. As to Graham, his professional connection extends daily: he
is so much sought after, so much engaged, that I tell him he will grow
quite conceited. Like a right good mother, as I am, I do my best to
keep him down: no flattery does he get from me, as you know. And yet,
Lucy, he is a fine fellow: his mother's heart dances at the sight of
him. After being hurried here and there the whole day, and passing the
ordeal of fifty sorts of tempers, and combating a hundred caprices,
and sometimes witnessing cruel sufferings--perhaps, occasionally, as I
tell him, inflicting them--at night he still comes home to me in such
kindly, pleasant mood, that really, I seem to live in a sort of moral
antipodes, and on these January evenings my day rises when other
people's night sets in.
"Still he needs keeping in order, and correcting, and repressing, and
I do him that good service; but the boy is so elastic there is no such
thing as vexing him thoroughly. When I think I have at last driven him
to the sullens, he turns on me with jokes for retaliation: but you
know him and all his iniquities, and I am but an elderly simpleton to
make him the subject of this epistle.
"As for me, I have had my old Bretton agent here on a visit, and have
been plunged overhead and ears in business matters. I do so wish to
regain for Graham at least some part of what his father left him. He
laughs to scorn my anxiety on this point, bidding me look and see how
he can provide for himself and me too, and asking what the old lady
can possibly want that she has not; hinting about sky-blue turbans;
accusing me of an ambition to wear diamonds, keep livery servants,
have an hotel, and lead the fashion amongst the English clan in
Villette.
"Talking of sky-blue turbans, I wish you had been with us the other
evening. He had come in really tired, and after I had given him his
tea, he threw himself into my chair with his customary presumption. To
my great delight, he dropped asleep. (You know how he teases me about
being drowsy; I, who never, by any chance, close an eye by daylight.)
While he slept, I thought he looked very bonny, Lucy: fool as I am to
be so proud of him; but who can help it? Show me his peer. Look where
I will, I see nothing like him in Villette. Well, I took it into my
head to play him a trick: so I brought out the sky-blue turban, and
handling it with gingerly precaution, I managed to invest his brows
with this grand adornment. I assure you it did not at all misbecome
him; he looked quite Eastern, except that he is so fair. Nobody,
however, can accuse him of having red hair _now_--it is genuine
chestnut--a dark, glossy chestnut; and when I put my large cashmere
about him, there was as fine a young bey, dey, or pacha improvised as
you would wish to see.
"It was good entertainment; but only half-enjoyed, since I was alone:
you should have been there.
"In due time my lord awoke: the looking-glass above the fireplace soon
intimated to him his plight: as you may imagine, I now live under
threat and dread of vengeance.
"But to come to the gist of my letter. I know Thursday is a half-
holiday in the Rue Fossette: be ready, then, by five in the afternoon,
at which hour I will send the carriage to take you out to La Terrasse.
Be sure to come: you may meet some old acquaintance. Good-by, my wise,
dear, grave little god-daughter.--Very truly yours,
"LOUISA BRETTON.".
Now, a letter like that sets one to rights! I might still be sad after
reading that letter, but I was more composed; not exactly cheered,
perhaps, but relieved. My friends, at least, were well and happy: no
accident had occurred to Graham; no illness had seized his mother-
calamities that had so long been my dream and thought. Their feelings
for me too were--as they had been. Yet, how strange it was to look on
Mrs: Bretton's seven weeks and contrast them with my seven weeks!
Also, how very wise it is in people placed in an exceptional position
to hold their tongues and not rashly declare how such position galls
them! The world can understand well enough the process of perishing
for want of food: perhaps few persons can enter into or follow out
that of going mad from solitary confinement. They see the long-buried
prisoner disinterred, a maniac or an idiot!--how his senses left him--
how his nerves, first inflamed, underwent nameless agony, and then
sunk to palsy--is a subject too intricate for examination, too
abstract for popular comprehension. Speak of it! you might almost as
well stand up in an European market-place, and propound dark sayings
in that language and mood wherein Nebuchadnezzar, the imperial
hypochondriac, communed with his baffled Chaldeans. And long, long may
the minds to whom such themes are no mystery--by whom their bearings
are sympathetically seized--be few in number, and rare of rencounter.
Long may it be generally thought that physical privations alone merit
compassion, and that the rest is