this corridor."
"There is no draught, Dr. John," said I, turning.
"She takes cold so easily," he pursued, looking at Ginevra with
extreme kindness. "She is delicate; she must be cared for: fetch her a
shawl."
"Permit me to judge for myself," said Miss Fanshawe, with hauteur. "I
want no shawl."
"Your dress is thin, you have been dancing, you are heated."
"Always preaching," retorted she; "always coddling and admonishing."
The answer Dr. John would have given did not come; that his heart was
hurt became evident in his eye; darkened, and saddened, and pained, he
turned a little aside, but was patient. I knew where there were plenty
of shawls near at hand; I ran and fetched one.
"She shall wear this, if I have strength to make her," said I, folding
it well round her muslin dress, covering carefully her neck and her
arms. "Is that Isidore?" I asked, in a somewhat fierce whisper.
She pushed up her lip, smiled, and nodded.
"Is _that_ Isidore?" I repeated, giving her a shake: I could have
given her a dozen.
"C'est lui-meme," said she. "How coarse he is, compared with the
Colonel-Count! And then--oh ciel!--the whiskers!"
Dr. John now passed on.
"The Colonel-Count!" I echoed. "The doll--the puppet--the manikin--the
poor inferior creature! A mere lackey for Dr. John his valet, his
foot-boy! Is it possible that fine generous gentleman--handsome as a
vision--offers you his honourable hand and gallant heart, and promises
to protect your flimsy person and feckless mind through the storms and
struggles of life--and you hang back--you scorn, you sting, you
torture him! Have you power to do this? Who gave you that power? Where
is it? Does it lie all in your beauty--your pink and white complexion,
and your yellow hair? Does this bind his soul at your feet, and bend
his neck under your yoke? Does this purchase for you his affection,
his tenderness, his thoughts, his hopes, his interest, his noble,
cordial love--and will you not have it? Do you scorn it? You are only
dissembling: you are not in earnest: you love him; you long for him;
but you trifle with his heart to make him more surely yours?"
"Bah! How you run on! I don't understand half you have said."
I had got her out into the garden ere this. I now set her down on a
seat and told her she should not stir till she had avowed which she
meant in the end to accept--the man or the monkey.
"Him you call the man," said she, "is bourgeois, sandy-haired, and
answers to the name of John!--cela suffit: je n'en veux pas. Colonel
de Hamal is a gentleman of excellent connections, perfect manners,
sweet appearance, with pale interesting face, and hair and eyes like
an Italian. Then too he is the most delightful company possible--a man
quite in my way; not sensible and serious like the other; but one with
whom I can talk on equal terms--who does not plague and bore, and
harass me with depths, and heights, and passions, and talents for
which I have no taste. There now. Don't hold me so fast."
I slackened my grasp, and she darted off. I did not care to pursue
her.
Somehow I could not avoid returning once more in the direction of the
corridor to get another glimpse of Dr. John; but I met him on the
garden-steps, standing where the light from a window fell broad. His
well-proportioned figure was not to be mistaken, for I doubt whether
there was another in that assemblage his equal. He carried his hat in
his hand; his uncovered head, his face and fine brow were most
handsome and manly. _His_ features were not delicate, not slight
like those of a woman, nor were they cold, frivolous, and feeble;
though well cut, they were not so chiselled, so frittered away, as to
lose in expression or significance what they gained in unmeaning
symmetry. Much feeling spoke in them at times, and more sat silent in
his eye. Such at least were my thoughts of him: to me he seemed all
this. An inexpressible sense of wonder occupied me, as I looked at
this man, and reflected that _he_ could not be slighted.
It was, not my intention to approach or address him in the garden, our
terms of acquaintance not warranting such a step; I had only meant to
view him in the crowd--myself unseen: coming upon him thus alone, I
withdrew. But he was looking out for me, or rather for her who had
been with me: therefore he descended the steps, and followed me down
the alley.
"You know Miss Fanshawe? I have often wished to ask whether you knew
her," said he.
"Yes: I know her."
"Intimately?"
"Quite as intimately as I wish."
"What have you done with her now?"
"Am I her keeper?" I felt inclined to ask; but I simply answered, "I
have shaken her well, and would have shaken her better, but she
escaped out of my hands and ran away."
"Would you favour me," he asked, "by watching over her this one
evening, and observing that she does nothing imprudent--does not, for
instance, run out into the night-air immediately after dancing?"
"I may, perhaps, look after her a little; since you wish it; but she
likes her own way too well to submit readily to control."
"She is so young, so thoroughly artless," said he.
"To me she is an enigma," I responded.
"Is she?" he asked--much interested. "How?"
"It would be difficult to say how--difficult, at least, to tell
_you_ how."
"And why me?"
"I wonder she is not better pleased that you are so much her friend."
"But she has not the slightest idea how much I _am_ her friend.
That is precisely the point I cannot teach her. May I inquire did she
ever speak of me to you?"
"Under the name of 'Isidore' she has talked about you often; but I
must add that it is only within the last ten minutes I have discovered
that you and 'Isidore' are identical. It is only, Dr. John, within
that brief space of time I have learned that Ginevra Fanshawe is the
person, under this roof, in whom you have long been interested--that
she is the magnet which attracts you to the Rue Fossette, that for her
sake you venture into this garden, and seek out caskets dropped by
rivals."
"You know all?"
"I know so much."
"For more than a year I have been accustomed to meet her in society.
Mrs. Cholmondeley, her friend, is an acquaintance of mine; thus