to fancy that it is my merits which attract her
attention; it must then be some defect. Dare I ask--what?"
I was confounded, as the reader may suppose, yet not with an
irrecoverable confusion; being conscious that it was from no emotion
of incautious admiration, nor yet in a spirit of unjustifiable
inquisitiveness, that I had incurred this reproof. I might have
cleared myself on the spot, but would not. I did not speak. I was not
in the habit of speaking to him. Suffering him, then, to think what he
chose and accuse me of what he would, I resumed some work I had
dropped, and kept my head bent over it during the remainder of his
stay. There is a perverse mood of the mind which is rather soothed
than irritated by misconstruction; and in quarters where we can never
be rightly known, we take pleasure, I think, in being consummately
ignored. What honest man, on being casually taken for a housebreaker,
does not feel rather tickled than vexed at the mistake?
CHAPTER XI.
THE PORTRESS'S CABINET.
It was summer and very hot. Georgette, the youngest of Madame Beck's
children, took a fever. Desiree, suddenly cured of her ailments, was,
together with Fifine, packed off to Bonne-Maman, in the country, by
way of precaution against infection. Medical aid was now really
needed, and Madame, choosing to ignore the return of Dr. Pillule, who
had been at home a week, conjured his English rival to continue his
visits. One or two of the pensionnaires complained of headache, and in
other respects seemed slightly to participate in Georgette's ailment.
"Now, at last," I thought, "Dr. Pillule must be recalled: the prudent
directress will never venture to permit the attendance of so young a
man on the pupils."
The directress was very prudent, but she could also be intrepidly
venturous. She actually introduced Dr. John to the school-division of
the premises, and established him in attendance on the proud and
handsome Blanche de Melcy, and the vain, flirting Angelique, her
friend. Dr. John, I thought, testified a certain gratification at this
mark of confidence; and if discretion of bearing could have justified
the step, it would by him have been amply justified. Here, however, in
this land of convents and confessionals, such a presence as his was
not to be suffered with impunity in a "pensionnat de demoiselles." The
school gossiped, the kitchen whispered, the town caught the rumour,
parents wrote letters and paid visits of remonstrance. Madame, had she
been weak, would now have been lost: a dozen rival educational houses
were ready to improve this false step--if false step it were--to her
ruin; but Madame was not weak, and little Jesuit though she might be,
yet I clapped the hands of my heart, and with its voice cried "brava!"
as I watched her able bearing, her skilled management, her temper and
her firmness on this occasion.
She met the alarmed parents with a good-humoured, easy grace for
nobody matched her in, I know not whether to say the possession or the
assumption of a certain "rondeur et franchise de bonne femme;" which
on various occasions gained the point aimed at with instant and
complete success, where severe gravity and serious reasoning would
probably have failed.
"Ce pauvre Docteur Jean!" she would say, chuckling and rubbing
joyously her fat little white hands; "ce cher jeune homme! le meilleur
creature du monde!" and go on to explain how she happened to be
employing him for her own children, who were so fond of him they would
scream themselves into fits at the thought of another doctor; how,
where she had confidence for her own, she thought it natural to repose
trust for others, and au reste, it was only the most temporary
expedient in the world; Blanche and Angelique had the migraine; Dr.
John had written a prescription; voila tout!
The parents' mouths were closed. Blanche and Angelique saved her all
remaining trouble by chanting loud duets in their physician's praise;
the other pupils echoed them, unanimously declaring that when they
were ill they would have Dr. John and nobody else; and Madame laughed,
and the parents laughed too. The Labassecouriens must have a large
organ of philoprogenitiveness: at least the indulgence of offspring is
carried by them to excessive lengths; the law of most households being
the children's will. Madame now got credit for having acted on this
occasion in a spirit of motherly partiality: she came off with flying
colours; people liked her as a directress better than ever.
To this day I never fully understood why she thus risked her interest
for the sake of Dr. John. What people said, of course I know well: the
whole house--pupils, teachers, servants included--affirmed that she
was going to marry him. So they had settled it; difference of age
seemed to make no obstacle in their eyes: it was to be so.
It must be admitted that appearances did not wholly discountenance
this idea; Madame seemed so bent on retaining his services, so
oblivious of her former protege, Pillule. She made, too, such a point
of personally receiving his visits, and was so unfailingly cheerful,
blithe, and benignant in her manner to him. Moreover, she paid, about
this time, marked attention to dress: the morning dishabille, the
nightcap and shawl, were discarded; Dr. John's early visits always
found her with auburn braids all nicely arranged, silk dress trimly
fitted on, neat laced brodequins in lieu of slippers: in short the
whole toilette complete as a model, and fresh as a flower. I scarcely
think, however, that her intention in this went further than just to
show a very handsome man that she was not quite a plain woman; and
plain she was not. Without beauty of feature or elegance of form, she
pleased. Without youth and its gay graces, she cheered. One never
tired of seeing her: she was never monotonous, or insipid, or
colourless, or flat. Her unfaded hair, her eye with its temperate blue
light, her cheek with its wholesome fruit-like bloom--these things
pleased in moderation, but with constancy.
Had she, indeed, floating visions of adopting Dr. John as a husband,
taking him to her well-furnished home, endowing him with her savings,
which were said to amount to a moderate competency, and making him
comfortable for the rest of his life? Did Dr. John suspect her of such
visions? I have met him coming out of her presence with a mischievous
half-smile about his lips, and in his eyes a look as of masculine
vanity elate and tickled.