the action was
small indeed, for I had run no risk, and subsequently did not even catch
cold from the wetting; but when M. and Madame Vandenhuten, of whom Jean
Baptiste was the sole hope, came to hear of the exploit, they seemed
to think I had evinced a bravery and devotion which no thanks could
sufficiently repay. Madame, in particular, was "certain I must have
dearly loved their sweet son, or I would not thus have hazarded my own
life to save his." Monsieur, an honest-looking, though phlegmatic man,
said very little, but he would not suffer me to leave the room, till
I had promised that in case I ever stood in need of help I would, by
applying to him, give him a chance of discharging the obligation under
which he affirmed I had laid him. These words, then, were my glimmer of
light; it was here I found my sole outlet; and in truth, though the cold
light roused, it did not cheer me; nor did the outlet seem such as I
should like to pass through. Right I had none to M. Vandenhuten's good
offices; it was not on the ground of merit I could apply to him; no, I
must stand on that of necessity: I had no work; I wanted work; my best
chance of obtaining it lay in securing his recommendation. This I knew
could be had by asking for it; not to ask, because the request revolted
my pride and contradicted my habits, would, I felt, be an indulgence of
false and indolent fastidiousness. I might repent the omission all my
life; I would not then be guilty of it.
That evening I went to M. Vandenhuten's; but I had bent the bow and
adjusted the shaft in vain; the string broke. I rang the bell at the
great door (it was a large, handsome house in an expensive part of the
town); a manservant opened; I asked for M. Vandenhuten; M. Vandenhuten
and family were all out of town--gone to Ostend--did not know when they
would be back. I left my card, and retraced my steps.
CHAPTER XXII
A WEEK is gone; LE JOUR DES NOCES arrived; the marriage was solemnized
at St. Jacques; Mdlle. Zoraide became Madame Pelet, NEE Reuter; and, in
about an hour after this transformation, "the happy pair," as newspapers
phrase it, were on their way to Paris; where, according to previous
arrangement, the honeymoon was to be spent. The next day I quitted the
pensionnat. Myself and my chattels (some books and clothes) were soon
transferred to a modest lodging I had hired in a street not far off. In
half an hour my clothes were arranged in a commode, my books on a shelf,
and the "flitting" was effected. I should not have been unhappy that day
had not one pang tortured me--a longing to go to the Rue Notre Dame
aux Neiges, resisted, yet irritated by an inward resolve to avoid
that street till such time as the mist of doubt should clear from my
prospects.
It was a sweet September evening--very mild, very still; I had nothing
to do; at that hour I knew Frances would be equally released from
occupation; I thought she might possibly be wishing for her master, I
knew I wished for my pupil. Imagination began with her low whispers,
infusing into my soul the soft tale of pleasures that might be.
"You will find her reading or writing," said she; "you can take your
seat at her side; you need not startle her peace by undue excitement;
you need not embarrass her manner by unusual action or language. Be as
you always are; look over what she has written; listen while she reads;
chide her, or quietly approve; you know the effect of either system; you
know her smile when pleased, you know the play of her looks when roused;
you have the secret of awakening that expression you will, and you can
choose amongst that pleasant variety. With you she will sit silent as
long as it suits you to talk alone; you can hold her under a potent
spell: intelligent as she is, eloquent as she can be, you can seal her
lips, and veil her bright countenance with diffidence; yet, you know,
she is not all monotonous mildness; you have seen, with a sort of
strange pleasure, revolt, scorn, austerity, bitterness, lay energetic
claim to a place in her feelings and physiognomy; you know that few
could rule her as you do; you know she might break, but never bend under
the hand of Tyranny and Injustice, but Reason and Affection can guide
her by a sign. Try their influence now. Go--they are not passions; you
may handle them safely."
"I will NOT go was my answer to the sweet temptress. A man is master
of himself to a certain point, but not beyond it. Could I seek Frances
to-night, could I sit with her alone in a quiet room, and address her
only in the language of Reason and Affection?"
"No," was the brief, fervent reply of that Love which had conquered and
now controlled me.
Time seemed to stagnate; the sun would not go down; my watch ticked, but
I thought the hands were paralyzed.
"What a hot evening!" I cried, throwing open the lattice; for, indeed, I
had seldom felt so feverish. Hearing a step ascending the common stair,
I wondered whether the "locataire," now mounting to his apartments, were
as unsettled in mind and condition as I was, or whether he lived in the
calm of certain resources, and in the freedom of unfettered feelings.
What! was he coming in person to solve the problem hardly proposed in
inaudible thought? He had actually knocked at the door--at MY door; a
smart, prompt rap; and, almost before I could invite him in, he was over
the threshold, and had closed the door behind him.
"And how are you?" asked an indifferent, quiet voice, in the English
language; while my visitor, without any sort of bustle or introduction,
put his hat on the table, and his gloves into his hat, and drawing
the only armchair the room afforded a little forward, seated himself
tranquilly therein.
"Can't you speak?" he inquired in a few moments, in a tone whose
nonchalance seemed to intimate that it was much the same thing whether
I answered or not. The fact is, I found it desirable to have recourse to
my good friends "les besicles;" not exactly