to ascertain the identity of
my visitor--for I already knew him, confound his impudence! but to see
how he looked--to get a clear notion of his mien and countenance.
I wiped the glasses very deliberately, and put them on quite as
deliberately; adjusting them so as not to hurt the bridge of my nose
or get entangled in my short tufts of dun hair. I was sitting in the
window-seat, with my back to the light, and I had him VIS-A-VIS; a
position he would much rather have had reversed; for, at any time, he
preferred scrutinizing to being scrutinized. Yes, it was HE, and no
mistake, with his six feet of length arranged in a sitting attitude;
with his dark travelling surtout with its velvet collar, his gray
pantaloons, his black stock, and his face, the most original one Nature
ever modelled, yet the least obtrusively so; not one feature that could
be termed marked or odd, yet the effect of the whole unique. There is no
use in attempting to describe what is indescribable. Being in no hurry
to address him, I sat and stared at my ease.
"Oh, that's your game--is it?" said he at last. "Well, we'll see which
is soonest tired." And he slowly drew out a fine cigar-case, picked one
to his taste, lit it, took a book from the shelf convenient to his hand,
then leaning back, proceeded to smoke and read as tranquilly as if he
had been in his own room, in Grove-street, X---shire, England. I knew
he was capable of continuing in that attitude till midnight, if he
conceived the whim, so I rose, and taking the book from his hand, I
said,--
"You did not ask for it, and you shall not have it."
"It is silly and dull," he observed, "so I have not lost much;" then the
spell being broken, he went on. "I thought you lived at Pelet's; I went
there this afternoon expecting to be starved to death by sitting in
a boarding-school drawing-room, and they told me you were gone, had
departed this morning; you had left your address behind you though,
which I wondered at; it was a more practical and sensible precaution
than I should have imagined you capable of. Why did you leave?"
"Because M. Pelet has just married the lady whom you and Mr. Brown
assigned to me as my wife."
"Oh, indeed!" replied Hunsden with a short laugh; "so you've lost both
your wife and your place?"
"Precisely so."
I saw him give a quick, covert glance all round my room; he marked its
narrow limits, its scanty furniture: in an instant he had comprehended
the state of matters--had absolved me from the crime of prosperity. A
curious effect this discovery wrought in his strange mind; I am morally
certain that if he had found me installed in a handsome parlour,
lounging on a soft couch, with a pretty, wealthy wife at my side, he
would have hated me; a brief, cold, haughty visit, would in such a case
have been the extreme limit of his civilities, and never would he have
come near me more, so long as the tide of fortune bore me smoothly on
its surface; but the painted furniture, the bare walls, the cheerless
solitude of my room relaxed his rigid pride, and I know not what
softening change had taken place both in his voice and look ere he spoke
again.
"You have got another place?"
"No."
"You are in the way of getting one?"
"No."
"That is bad; have you applied to Brown?"
"No, indeed."
"You had better; he often has it in his power to give useful information
in such matters."
"He served me once very well; I have no claim on him, and am not in the
humour to bother him again."
"Oh, if you're bashful, and dread being intrusive, you need only
commission me. I shall see him to-night; I can put in a word."
"I beg you will not, Mr. Hunsden; I am in your debt already; you did me
an important service when I was at X----; got me out of a den where I
was dying: that service I have never repaid, and at present I decline
positively adding another item to the account."
"If the wind sits that way, I'm satisfied. I thought my unexampled
generosity in turning you out of that accursed counting-house would be
duly appreciated some day: 'Cast your bread on the waters, and it
shall be found after many days,' say the Scriptures. Yes, that's right,
lad--make much of me--I'm a nonpareil: there's nothing like me in the
common herd. In the meantime, to put all humbug aside and talk sense for
a few moments, you would be greatly the better of a situation, and what
is more, you are a fool if you refuse to take one from any hand that
offers it."
"Very well, Mr. Hunsden; now you have settled that point, talk of
something else. What news from X----?"
"I have not settled that point, or at least there is another to settle
before we get to X----. Is this Miss Zenobie" (Zoraide, interposed
I)--"well, Zoraide--is she really married to Pelet?"
"I tell you yes--and if you don't believe me, go and ask the cure of St.
Jacques."
"And your heart is broken?"
"I am not aware that it is; it feels all right--beats as usual."
"Then your feelings are less superfine than I took them to be; you must
be a coarse, callous character, to bear such a thwack without staggering
under it."
"Staggering under it? What the deuce is there to stagger under in the
circumstance of a Belgian schoolmistress marrying a French schoolmaster?
The progeny will doubtless be a strange hybrid race; but that's their
Look out--not mine."
"He indulges in scurrilous jests, and the bride was his affianced one!"
"Who said so?"
"Brown."
"I'll tell you what, Hunsden--Brown is an old gossip."
"He is; but in the meantime, if his gossip be founded on less than
fact--if you took no particular interest in Miss Zoraide--why, O
youthful pedagogue! did you leave your place in consequence of her
becoming Madame Pelet?"
"Because--" I felt my face grow a little hot; "because--in short, Mr.
Hunsden, I decline answering any more questions," and I plunged my hands
deep in my breeches pocket.
Hunsden triumphed: his eyes--his laugh announced victory.
"What the deuce are you laughing at, Mr. Hunsden?"
"At your exemplary composure. Well, lad, I'll not bore you; I see how
it is: Zoraide has jilted you--married some one richer, as any sensible
woman