window over
which the curtain was not dropped, for I designed to watch him ride up
the white walk; I see and feel the soft firelight warming me, playing
on my silk dress, and fitfully showing me my own young figure in a
glass. I see the moon of a calm winter night, float full, clear, and
cold, over the inky mass of shrubbery, and the silvered turf of my
grounds. I wait, with some impatience in my pulse, but no doubt in my
breast. The flames had died in the fire, but it was a bright mass yet;
the moon was mounting high, but she was still visible from the
lattice; the clock neared ten; he rarely tarried later than this, but
once or twice he had been delayed so long.
"Would he for once fail me? No--not even for once; and now he was
coming--and coming fast-to atone for lost time. 'Frank! you furious
rider,' I said inwardly, listening gladly, yet anxiously, to his
approaching gallop, 'you shall be rebuked for this: I will tell you it
is _my_ neck you are putting in peril; for whatever is yours is,
in a dearer and tenderer sense, mine.' There he was: I saw him; but I
think tears were in my eyes, my sight was so confused. I saw the
horse; I heard it stamp--I saw at least a mass; I heard a clamour.
_Was_ it a horse? or what heavy, dragging thing was it, crossing,
strangely dark, the lawn. How could I name that thing in the moonlight
before me? or how could I utter the feeling which rose in my soul?
"I could only run out. A great animal--truly, Frank's black horse--
stood trembling, panting, snorting before the door; a man held it
Frank, as I thought.
"'What is the matter?' I demanded. Thomas, my own servant, answered by
saying sharply, 'Go into the house, madam.' And then calling to
another servant, who came hurrying from the kitchen as if summoned by
some instinct, 'Ruth, take missis into the house directly.' But I was
kneeling down in the snow, beside something that lay there--something
that I had seen dragged along the ground--something that sighed, that
groaned on my breast, as I lifted and drew it to ms. He was not dead;
he was not quite unconscious. I had him carried in; I refused to be
ordered about and thrust from him. I was quite collected enough, not
only to be my own mistress but the mistress of others. They had begun
by trying to treat me like a child, as they always do with people
struck by God's hand; but I gave place to none except the surgeon; and
when he had done what he could, I took my dying Frank to myself. He
had strength to fold me in his arms; he had power to speak my name; he
heard me as I prayed over him very softly; he felt me as I tenderly
and fondly comforted him.
"'Maria,' he said, 'I am dying in Paradise.' He spent his last breath
in faithful words for me. When the dawn of Christmas morning broke, my
Frank was with God.
"And that," she went on, "happened thirty years ago. I have suffered
since. I doubt if I have made the best use of all my calamities. Soft,
amiable natures they would have refined to saintliness; of strong,
evil spirits they would have made demons; as for me, I have only been
a woe-struck and selfish woman."
"You have done much good," I said; for she was noted for her liberal
almsgiving.
"I have not withheld money, you mean, where it could assuage
affliction. What of that? It cost me no effort or pang to give. But I
think from this day I am about to enter a better frame of mind, to
prepare myself for reunion with Frank. You see I still think of Frank
more than of God; and unless it be counted that in thus loving the
creature so much, so long, and so exclusively, I have not at least
blasphemed the Creator, small is my chance of salvation. What do you
think, Lucy, of these things? Be my chaplain, and tell me."
This question I could not answer: I had no words. It seemed as if she
thought I _had_ answered it.
"Very right, my child. We should acknowledge God merciful, but not
always for us comprehensible. We should accept our own lot, whatever
it be, and try to render happy that of others. Should we not? Well,
to-morrow I will begin by trying to make you happy. I will endeavour
to do something for you, Lucy: something that will benefit you when I
am dead. My head aches now with talking too much; still I am happy. Go
to bed. The clock strikes two. How late you sit up; or rather how late
I, in my selfishness, keep you up. But go now; have no more anxiety
for me; I feel I shall rest well."
She composed herself as if to slumber. I, too, retired to my crib in a
closet within her room. The night passed in quietness; quietly her
doom must at last have come: peacefully and painlessly: in the morning
she was found without life, nearly cold, but all calm and undisturbed.
Her previous excitement of spirits and change of mood had been the
prelude of a fit; one stroke sufficed to sever the thread of an
existence so long fretted by affliction.
CHAPTER V.
TURNING A NEW LEAF.
My mistress being dead, and I once more alone, I had to look out for
a new place. About this time I might be a little--a very little--
shaken in nerves. I grant I was not looking well, but, on the
contrary, thin, haggard, and hollow-eyed; like a sitter-up at night,
like an overwrought servant, or a placeless person in debt. In debt,
however, I was not; nor quite poor; for though Miss Marchmont had not
had time to benefit me, as, on that last night, she said she intended,
yet, after the funeral, my wages were duly paid by her second cousin,
the heir, an avaricious-looking man, with pinched nose and narrow
temples, who, indeed, I heard long afterwards, turned out a thorough
miser: a direct contrast to his generous kinswoman, and a foil to her
memory, blessed to this day by the poor and needy. The possessor,
then, of fifteen pounds; of health, though worn, not broken, and of a
spirit in