you to like him; he has
always seen you to disadvantage; he always will see you to disadvantage;
your positions are unequal, and were they on the same level your
minds could not; assimilate; never hope, then, to gather the honey of
friendship out of that thorn-guarded plant. Hello, Crimsworth! where are
your thoughts tending? You leave the recollection of Hunsden as a bee
would a rock, as a bird a desert; and your aspirations spread eager
wings towards a land of visions where, now in advancing daylight--in
X---- daylight--you dare to dream of congeniality, repose, union. Those
three you will never meet in this world; they are angels. The souls of
just men made perfect may encounter them in heaven, but your soul will
never be made perfect. Eight o'clock strikes! your hands are thawed, get
to work!"
"Work? why should I work?" said I sullenly: "I cannot please though I
toil like a slave." "Work, work!" reiterated the inward voice. "I may
work, it will do no good," I growled; but nevertheless I drew out a
packet of letters and commenced my task--task thankless and bitter as
that of the Israelite crawling over the sun-baked fields of Egypt in
search of straw and stubble wherewith to accomplish his tale of bricks.
About ten o'clock I heard Mr. Crimsworth's gig turn into the yard, and
in a minute or two he entered the counting-house. It was his custom to
glance his eye at Steighton and myself, to hang up his mackintosh, stand
a minute with his back to the fire, and then walk out. Today he did
not deviate from his usual habits; the only difference was that when
he looked at me, his brow, instead of being merely hard, was surly; his
eye, instead of being cold, was fierce. He studied me a minute or two
longer than usual, but went out in silence.
Twelve o'clock arrived; the bell rang for a suspension of labour; the
workpeople went off to their dinners; Steighton, too, departed, desiring
me to lock the counting-house door, and take the key with me. I
was tying up a bundle of papers, and putting them in their place,
preparatory to closing my desk, when Crimsworth reappeared at the door,
and entering closed it behind him.
"You'll stay here a minute," said he, in a deep, brutal voice, while his
nostrils distended and his eye shot a spark of sinister fire.
Alone with Edward I remembered our relationship, and remembering that
forgot the difference of position; I put away deference and careful
forms of speech; I answered with simple brevity.
"It is time to go home," I said, turning the key in my desk.
"You'll stay here!" he reiterated. "And take your hand off that key!
leave it in the lock!"
"Why?" asked I. "What cause is there for changing my usual plans?"
"Do as I order," was the answer, "and no questions! You are my servant,
obey me! What have you been about--?" He was going on in the same
breath, when an abrupt pause announced that rage had for the moment got
the better of articulation.
"You may look, if you wish to know," I replied. "There is the open desk,
there are the papers."
"Confound your insolence! What have you been about?"
"Your work, and have done it well."
"Hypocrite and twaddler! Smooth-faced, snivelling greasehorn!" (this
last term is, I believe, purely ----shire, and alludes to the horn of
black, rancid whale-oil, usually to be seen suspended to cart-wheels,
and employed for greasing the same.)
"Come, Edward Crimsworth, enough of this. It is time you and I wound up
accounts. I have now given your service three months' trial, and I find
it the most nauseous slavery under the sun. Seek another clerk. I stay
no longer."
"What I do you dare to give me notice? Stop at least for your wages." He
took down the heavy gig whip hanging beside his mackintosh.
I permitted myself to laugh with a degree of scorn I took no pains to
temper or hide. His fury boiled up, and when he had sworn half-a-dozen
vulgar, impious oaths, without, however, venturing to lift the whip, he
continued:
"I've found you out and know you thoroughly, you mean, whining
lickspittle! What have you been saying all over X---- about me? answer
me that!"
"You? I have neither inclination nor temptation to talk about you."
"You lie! It is your practice to talk about me; it is your constant
habit to make public complaint of the treatment you receive at my hands.
You have gone and told it far and near that I give you low wages and
knock you about like a dog. I wish you were a dog! I'd set-to this
minute, and never stir from the spot till I'd cut every strip of flesh
from your bones with this whip."
He flourished his tool. The end of the lash just touched my forehead.
A warm excited thrill ran through my veins, my blood seemed to give
abound, and then raced fast and hot along its channels. I got up nimbly,
came round to where he stood, and faced him.
"Down with your whip!" said I, "and explain this instant what you mean."
"Sirrah! to whom are you speaking?"
"To you. There is no one else present, I think. You say I have been
calumniating you--complaining of your low wages and bad treatment. Give
your grounds for these assertions."
Crimsworth had no dignity, and when I sternly demanded an explanation,
he gave one in a loud, scolding voice.
"Grounds! you shall have them; and turn to the light that I may see your
brazen face blush black, when you hear yourself proved to be a liar and
a hypocrite. At a public meeting in the Town-hall yesterday, I had the
pleasure of hearing myself insulted by the speaker opposed to me in the
question under discussion, by allusions to my private affairs; by cant
about monsters without natural affection, family despots, and such
trash; and when I rose to answer, I was met by a shout from the filthy
mob, where the mention of your name enabled me at once to detect the
quarter in which this base attack had originated. When I looked round, I
saw that treacherous villain, Hunsden acting as fugleman. I detected you
in close conversation with Hunsden at my house a month ago, and I know
that you were at Hunsden's rooms last night. Deny it if you dare."
"Oh, I shall not deny it! And if Hunsden