for he had been thinking, and very
intently thinking, his own thoughts, after his own manner. "How did he
like Vashti?" I wished to know.
"Hm-m-m," was the first scarce articulate but expressive answer; and
then such a strange smile went wandering round his lips, a smile so
critical, so almost callous! I suppose that for natures of that order
his sympathies _were_ callous. In a few terse phrases he told me
his opinion of, and feeling towards, the actress: he judged her as a
woman, not an artist: it was a branding judgment.
That night was already marked in my book of life, not with white, but
with a deep-red cross. But I had not done with it yet; and other
memoranda were destined to be set down in characters of tint
indelible.
Towards midnight, when the deepening tragedy blackened to the death-
scene, and all held their breath, and even Graham bit his under-lip,
and knit his brow, and sat still and struck--when the whole theatre
was hushed, when the vision of all eyes centred in one point, when all
ears listened towards one quarter--nothing being seen but the white
form sunk on a seat, quivering in conflict with her last, her worst-
hated, her visibly-conquering foe--nothing heard but her throes, her
gaspings, breathing yet of mutiny, panting still defiance; when, as it
seemed, an inordinate will, convulsing a perishing mortal frame, bent
it to battle with doom and death, fought every inch of ground, sold
every drop of blood, resisted to the latest the rape of every faculty,
_would_ see, _would_ hear, _would_ breathe, _would_ live, up to,
within, well-nigh _beyond_ the moment when death says to all
sense and all being--"Thus far and no farther!"--
Just then a stir, pregnant with omen, rustled behind the scenes--feet
ran, voices spoke. What was it? demanded the whole house. A flame, a
smell of smoke replied.
"Fire!" rang through the gallery. "Fire!" was repeated, re-echoed,
yelled forth: and then, and faster than pen can set it down, came
panic, rushing, crushing--a blind, selfish, cruel chaos.
And Dr. John? Reader, I see him yet, with his look of comely courage
and cordial calm.
"Lucy will sit still, I know," said he, glancing down at me with the
same serene goodness, the same repose of firmness that I have seen in
him when sitting at his side amid the secure peace of his mother's
hearth. Yes, thus adjured, I think I would have sat still under a
rocking crag: but, indeed, to sit still in actual circumstances was my
instinct; and at the price of my very life, I would not have moved to
give him trouble, thwart his will, or make demands on his attention.
We were in the stalls, and for a few minutes there was a most
terrible, ruthless pressure about us.
"How terrified are the women!" said he; "but if the men were not
almost equally so, order might be maintained. This is a sorry scene: I
see fifty selfish brutes at this moment, each of whom, if I were near,
I could conscientiously knock down. I see some women braver than some
men. There is one yonder--Good God!"
While Graham was speaking, a young girl who had been very quietly and
steadily clinging to a gentleman before us, was suddenly struck from
her protector's arms by a big, butcherly intruder, and hurled under
the feet of the crowd. Scarce two seconds lasted her disappearance.
Graham rushed forwards; he and the gentleman, a powerful man though
grey-haired, united their strength to thrust back the throng; her head
and long hair fell back over his shoulder: she seemed unconscious.
"Trust her with me; I am a medical man," said Dr. John.
"If you have no lady with you, be it so," was the answer. "Hold her,
and I will force a passage: we must get her to the air."
"I have a lady," said Graham; "but she will be neither hindrance nor
incumbrance."
He summoned me with his eye: we were separated. Resolute, however, to
rejoin him, I penetrated the living barrier, creeping under where I
could not get between or over.
"Fasten on me, and don't leave go," he said; and I obeyed him.
Our pioneer proved strong and adroit; he opened the dense mass like a
wedge; with patience and toil he at last bored through the flesh-and-
blood rock--so solid, hot, and suffocating--and brought us to the
fresh, freezing night.
"You are an Englishman!" said he, turning shortly on Dr. Bretton, when
we got into the street.
"An Englishman. And I speak to a countryman?" was the reply.
"Right. Be good enough to stand here two minutes, whilst I find my
carriage."
"Papa, I am not hurt," said a girlish voice; "am I with papa?"
"You are with a friend, and your father is close at hand."
"Tell him I am not hurt, except just in my shoulder. Oh, my shoulder!
They trod just here."
"Dislocation, perhaps!" muttered the Doctor: "let us hope there is no
worse injury done. Lucy, lend a hand one instant."
And I assisted while he made some arrangement of drapery and position
for the ease of his suffering burden. She suppressed a moan, and lay
in his arms quietly and patiently.
"She is very light," said Graham, "like a child!" and he asked in my
ear, "Is she a child, Lucy? Did you notice her age?"
"I am not a child--I am a person of seventeen," responded the patient,
demurely and with dignity. Then, directly after: "Tell papa to come; I
get anxious."
The carriage drove up; her father relieved Graham; but in the exchange
from one bearer to another she was hurt, and moaned again.
"My darling!" said the father, tenderly; then turning to Graham, "You
said, sir, you are a medical man?"
"I am: Dr. Bretton, of La Terrasse."
"Good. Will you step into my carriage?"
"My own carriage is here: I will seek it, and accompany you."
"Be pleased, then, to follow us." And he named his address: "The Hotel
Crecy, in the Rue Crecy."
We followed; the carriage drove fast; myself and Graham were silent.
This seemed like an adventure.
Some little time being lost in seeking our own equipage, we reached
the hotel perhaps about ten minutes after these strangers. It was an
hotel in the foreign sense: a collection of dwelling-houses, not an
inn--a vast, lofty pile, with a huge arch to its street-door, leading
through a vaulted covered way, into a square all built round.
We alighted, passed up a wide, handsome public staircase, and stopped
at Numero