my ear very willingly, for, small as it was, it possessed
its own spell, and bound my attention at once. It preached Romanism;
it persuaded to conversion. The voice of that sly little book was a
honeyed voice; its accents were all unction and balm. Here roared no
utterance of Rome's thunders, no blasting of the breath of her
displeasure. The Protestant was to turn Papist, not so much in fear of
the heretic's hell, as on account of the comfort, the indulgence, the
tenderness Holy Church offered: far be it from her to threaten or to
coerce; her wish was to guide and win. _She_ persecute? Oh dear
no! not on any account!
This meek volume was not addressed to the hardened and worldly; it was
not even strong meat for the strong: it was milk for babes: the mild
effluence of a mother's love towards her tenderest and her youngest;
intended wholly and solely for those whose head is to be reached
through the heart. Its appeal was not to intellect; it sought to win
the affectionate through their affections, the sympathizing through
their sympathies: St. Vincent de Paul, gathering his orphans about
him, never spoke more sweetly.
I remember one capital inducement to apostacy was held out in the fact
that the Catholic who had lost dear friends by death could enjoy the
unspeakable solace of praying them out of purgatory. The writer did
not touch on the firmer peace of those whose belief dispenses with
purgatory altogether: but I thought of this; and, on the whole,
preferred the latter doctrine as the most consolatory. The little book
amused, and did not painfully displease me. It was a canting,
sentimental, shallow little book, yet something about it cheered my
gloom and made me smile; I was amused with the gambols of this
unlicked wolf-cub muffled in the fleece, and mimicking the bleat of a
guileless lamb. Portions of it reminded me of certain Wesleyan
Methodist tracts I had once read when a child; they were flavoured
with about the same seasoning of excitation to fanaticism. He that had
written it was no bad man, and while perpetually betraying the trained
cunning--the cloven hoof of his system--I should pause before accusing
himself of insincerity. His judgment, however, wanted surgical props;
it was rickety.
I smiled then over this dose of maternal tenderness, coming from the
ruddy old lady of the Seven Hills; smiled, too, at my own
disinclination, not to say disability, to meet these melting favours.
Glancing at the title-page, I found the name of "Pere Silas." A fly-
leaf bore in small, but clear and well-known pencil characters: "From
P. C. D. E. to L--y." And when I saw this I laughed: but not in my
former spirit. I was revived.
A mortal bewilderment cleared suddenly from my head and vision; the
solution of the Sphinx-riddle was won; the conjunction of those two
names, Pere Silas and Paul Emanuel, gave the key to all. The penitent
had been with his director; permitted to withhold nothing; suffered to
keep no corner of his heart sacred to God and to himself; the whole
narrative of our late interview had been drawn from him; he had avowed
the covenant of fraternity, and spoken of his adopted sister. How
could such a covenant, such adoption, be sanctioned by the Church?
Fraternal communion with a heretic! I seemed to hear Pere Silas
annulling the unholy pact; warning his penitent of its perils;
entreating, enjoining reserve, nay, by the authority of his office,
and in the name, and by the memory of all M. Emanuel held most dear
and sacred, commanding the enforcement of that new system whose frost
had pierced to the marrow of my bones.
These may not seem pleasant hypotheses; yet, by comparison, they were
welcome. The vision of a ghostly troubler hovering in the background,
was as nothing, matched with the fear of spontaneous change arising in
M. Paul himself.
At this distance of time, I cannot be sure how far the above
conjectures were self-suggested: or in what measure they owed their
origin and confirmation to another quarter. Help was not wanting.
This evening there was no bright sunset: west and east were one cloud;
no summer night-mist, blue, yet rose-tinged, softened the distance; a
clammy fog from the marshes crept grey round Villette. To-night the
watering-pot might rest in its niche by the well: a small rain had
been drizzling all the afternoon, and still it fell fast and quietly.
This was no weather for rambling in the wet alleys, under the dripping
trees; and I started to hear Sylvie's sudden bark in the garden--her
bark of welcome. Surely she was not accompanied and yet this glad,
quick bark was never uttered, save in homage to one presence.
Through the glass door and the arching berceau, I commanded the deep
vista of the allee defendue: thither rushed Sylvie, glistening through
its gloom like a white guelder-rose. She ran to and fro, whining,
springing, harassing little birds amongst the bushes. I watched five
minutes; no fulfilment followed the omen. I returned to my books;
Sylvie's sharp bark suddenly ceased. Again I looked up. She was
standing not many yards distant, wagging her white feathery tail as
fast as the muscle would work, and intently watching the operations of
a spade, plied fast by an indefatigable hand. There was M. Emanuel,
bent over the soil, digging in the wet mould amongst the rain-laden
and streaming shrubs, working as hard as if his day's pittance were
yet to earn by the literal sweat of his brow.
In this sign I read a ruffled mood. He would dig thus in frozen snow
on the coldest winter day, when urged inwardly by painful emotion,
whether of nervous excitation, or, sad thoughts of self-reproach. He
would dig by the hour, with knit brow and set teeth, nor once lift his
head, or open his lips.
Sylvie watched till she was tired. Again scampering devious, bounding
here, rushing there, snuffing and sniffing everywhere; she at last
discovered me in classe. Instantly she flew barking at the panes, as
if to urge me forth to share her pleasure or her master's toil; she
had seen me occasionally walking in that alley with M. Paul; and I
doubt not, considered it my duty to join him now, wet as it was.
She made such a bustle that M. Paul at last looked up, and of course
perceived why, and at whom she barked. He whistled to call her off;
she only barked