his profession?"
"Ecclesiastic--pastor--he had a church."
"Since your mother is an Englishwoman, why do you not speak English with
more facility?"
"Maman est morte, il y a dix ans."
"And you do homage to her memory by forgetting her language. Have the
goodness to put French out of your mind so long as I converse with
you--keep to English."
"C'est si difficile, monsieur, quand on n'en a plus l'habitude."
"You had the habitude formerly, I suppose? Now answer me in your mother
tongue."
"Yes, sir, I spoke the English more than the French when I was a child."
"Why do you not speak it now?"
"Because I have no English friends."
"You live with your father, I suppose?"
"My father is dead."
"You have brothers and sisters?"
"Not one."
"Do you live alone?"
"No--I have an aunt--ma tante Julienne."
"Your father's sister?"
"Justement, monsieur."
"Is that English?"
"No--but I forget--"
"For which, mademoiselle, if you were a child I should certainly devise
some slight punishment; at your age--you must be two or three and
twenty, I should think?"
"Pas encore, monsieur--en un mois j'aurai dix-neuf ans."
"Well, nineteen is a mature age, and, having attained it, you ought to
be so solicitous for your own improvement, that it should not be needful
for a master to remind you twice of the expediency of your speaking
English whenever practicable."
To this wise speech I received no answer; and, when I looked up, my
pupil was smiling to herself a much-meaning, though not very gay smile;
it seemed to say, "He talks of he knows not what:" it said this
so plainly, that I determined to request information on the point
concerning which my ignorance seemed to be thus tacitly affirmed.
"Are you solicitous for your own improvement?"
"Rather."
"How do you prove it, mademoiselle?"
An odd question, and bluntly put; it excited a second smile.
"Why, monsieur, I am not inattentive--am I? I learn my lessons well--"
"Oh, a child can do that! and what more do you do?"
"What more can I do?"
"Oh, certainly, not much; but you are a teacher, are you not, as well as
a pupil?"
"Yes."
"You teach lace-mending?"
"Yes."
"A dull, stupid occupation; do you like it?"
"No--it is tedious."
"Why do you pursue it? Why do you not rather teach history, geography,
grammar, even arithmetic?"
"Is monsieur certain that I am myself thoroughly acquainted with these
studies?"
"I don't know; you ought to be at your age."
"But I never was at school, monsieur--"
"Indeed! What then were your friends--what was your aunt about? She is
very much to blame."
"No monsieur, no--my aunt is good--she is not to blame--she does what
she can; she lodges and nourishes me" (I report Mdlle. Henri's phrases
literally, and it was thus she translated from the French). "She is not
rich; she has only an annuity of twelve hundred francs, and it would be
impossible for her to send me to school."
"Rather," thought I to myself on hearing this, but I continued, in the
dogmatical tone I had adopted:--
"It is sad, however, that you should be brought up in ignorance of the
most ordinary branches of education; had you known something of history
and grammar you might, by degrees, have relinquished your lace-mending
drudgery, and risen in the world."
"It is what I mean to do."
"How? By a knowledge of English alone? That will not suffice; no
respectable family will receive a governess whose whole stock of
knowledge consists in a familiarity with one foreign language."
"Monsieur, I know other things."
"Yes, yes, you can work with Berlin wools, and embroider handkerchiefs
and collars--that will do little for you."
Mdlle. Henri's lips were unclosed to answer, but she checked herself,
as thinking the discussion had been sufficiently pursued, and remained
silent.
"Speak," I continued, impatiently; "I never like the appearance of
acquiescence when the reality is not there; and you had a contradiction
at your tongue's end."
"Monsieur, I have had many lessons both in grammar, history, geography,
and arithmetic. I have gone through a course of each study."
"Bravo! but how did you manage it, since your aunt could not afford lo
send you to school?"
"By lace-mending; by the thing monsieur despises so much."
"Truly! And now, mademoiselle, it will be a good exercise for you to
explain to me in English how such a result was produced by such means."
"Monsieur, I begged my aunt to have me taught lace-mending soon after
we came to Brussels, because I knew it was a METIER, a trade which was
easily learnt, and by which I could earn some money very soon. I learnt
it in a few days, and I quickly got work, for all the Brussels ladies
have old lace--very precious--which must be mended all the times it is
washed. I earned money a little, and this money I grave for lessons
in the studies I have mentioned; some of it I spent in buying books,
English books especially; soon I shall try to find a place of governess,
or school-teacher, when I can write and speak English well; but it will
be difficult, because those who know I have been a lace-mender will
despise me, as the pupils here despise me. Pourtant j'ai mon projet,"
she added in a lower tone.
"What is it?"
"I will go and live in England; I will teach French there."
The words were pronounced emphatically. She said "England" as you might
suppose an Israelite of Moses' days would have said Canaan.
"Have you a wish to see England?"
"Yes, and an intention."
And here a voice, the voice of the directress, interposed:
"Mademoiselle Henri, je crois qu'il va pleuvoir; vous feriez bien, ma
bonne amie, de retourner chez vous tout de suite."
In silence, without a word of thanks for this officious warning, Mdlle.
Henri collected her books; she moved to me respectfully, endeavoured to
move to her superior, though the endeavour was almost a failure, for her
head seemed as if it would not bend, and thus departed.
Where there is one grain of perseverance or wilfulness in the
composition, trifling obstacles are ever known rather to stimulate than
discourage. Mdlle. Reuter might as well have spared herself the trouble
of giving that intimation about the weather (by-the-by her prediction
was falsified by the event--it did not rain that evening). At the close
of the next lesson I was again at Mdlle. Henri's desk. Thus did I accost
her:--
"What is your idea of England, mademoiselle? Why do you wish to go
there?"
Accustomed by this time to the calculated abruptness of my manner, it no
longer discomposed or surprised her, and she answered with only so
much of