Paul; I think it was rather pleasant than
otherwise, to behold him set up there, fierce and frank, dark and
candid, testy and fearless, as when regnant on his estrade in class.
His presence was such a surprise: I had not once thought of expecting
him, though I knew he filled the chair of Belles Lettres in the
college. With _him_ in that Tribune, I felt sure that neither
formalism nor flattery would be our doom; but for what was vouchsafed
us, for what was poured suddenly, rapidly, continuously, on our heads
--I own I was not prepared.
He spoke to the princes, the nobles, the magistrates, and the
burghers, with just the same ease, with almost the same pointed,
choleric earnestness, with which he was wont to harangue the three
divisions of the Rue Fossette. The collegians he addressed, not as
schoolboys, but as future citizens and embryo patriots. The times
which have since come on Europe had not been foretold yet, and M.
Emanuel's spirit seemed new to me. Who would have thought the flat and
fat soil of Labassecour could yield political convictions and national
feelings, such as were now strongly expressed? Of the bearing of his
opinions I need here give no special indication; yet it may be
permitted me to say that I believed the little man not more earnest
than right in what he said: with all his fire he was severe and
sensible; he trampled Utopian theories under his heel; he rejected
wild dreams with scorn;--but when he looked in the face of tyranny--
oh, then there opened a light in his eye worth seeing; and when he
spoke of injustice, his voice gave no uncertain sound, but reminded me
rather of the band-trumpet, ringing at twilight from the park.
I do not think his audience were generally susceptible of sharing
his flame in its purity; but some of the college youth caught fire as
he eloquently told them what should be their path and endeavour in
their country's and in Europe's future. They gave him a long, loud,
ringing cheer, as he concluded: with all his fierceness, he was their
favourite professor.
As our party left the Hall, he stood at the entrance; he saw and knew
me, and lifted his hat; he offered his hand in passing, and uttered
the words "Qu'en dites vous?"--question eminently characteristic, and
reminding me, even in this his moment of triumph, of that inquisitive
restlessness, that absence of what I considered desirable self-
control, which were amongst his faults. He should not have cared just
then to ask what I thought, or what anybody thought, but he _did_
care, and he was too natural to conceal, too impulsive to repress his
wish. Well! if I blamed his over-eagerness, I liked his
_naivete_. I would have praised him: I had plenty of praise in my
heart; but, alas! no words on my lips. Who _has_ words at the
right moment? I stammered some lame expressions; but was truly glad
when other people, coming up with profuse congratulations, covered my
deficiency by their redundancy.
A gentleman introduced him to M. de Bassompierre; and the Count, who
had likewise been highly gratified, asked him to join his friends (for
the most part M. Emanuel's likewise), and to dine with them at the
Hotel Crecy. He declined dinner, for he was a man always somewhat shy
at meeting the advances of the wealthy: there was a strength of sturdy
independence in the stringing of his sinews--not obtrusive, but
pleasant enough to discover as one advanced in knowledge of his
character; he promised, however, to step in with his friend, M. A----,
a French Academician, in the course of the evening.
At dinner that day, Ginevra and Paulina each looked, in her own way,
very beautiful; the former, perhaps, boasted the advantage in material
charms, but the latter shone pre-eminent for attractions more subtle
and spiritual: for light and eloquence of eye, for grace of mien, for
winning variety of expression. Ginevra's dress of deep crimson
relieved well her light curls, and harmonized with her rose-like
bloom. Paulina's attire--in fashion close, though faultlessly neat,
but in texture clear and white--made the eye grateful for the delicate
life of her complexion, for the soft animation of her countenance, for
the tender depth of her eyes, for the brown shadow and bounteous flow
of her hair--darker than that of her Saxon cousin, as were also her
eyebrows, her eyelashes, her full irids, and large mobile pupils.
Nature having traced all these details slightly, and with a careless
hand, in Miss Fanshawe's case; and in Miss de Bassompierre's, wrought
them to a high and delicate finish.
Paulina was awed by the savants, but not quite to mutism: she
conversed modestly, diffidently; not without effort, but with so true
a sweetness, so fine and penetrating a sense, that her father more
than once suspended his own discourse to listen, and fixed on her an
eye of proud delight. It was a polite Frenchman, M. Z----, a very
learned, but quite a courtly man, who had drawn her into discourse. I
was charmed with her French; it was faultless--the structure correct,
the idioms true, the accent pure; Ginevra, who had lived half her life
on the Continent, could do nothing like it not that words ever failed
Miss Fanshawe, but real accuracy and purity she neither possessed, nor
in any number of years would acquire. Here, too, M. de Bassompierre
was gratified; for, on the point of language, he was critical.
Another listener and observer there was; one who, detained by some
exigency of his profession, had come in late to dinner. Both ladies
were quietly scanned by Dr. Bretton, at the moment of taking his seat
at the table; and that guarded survey was more than once renewed. His
arrival roused Miss Fanshawe, who had hitherto appeared listless: she
now became smiling and complacent, talked--though what she said was
rarely to the purpose--or rather, was of a purpose somewhat
mortifyingly below the standard of the occasion. Her light,
disconnected prattle might have gratified Graham once; perhaps it
pleased him still: perhaps it was only fancy which suggested the
thought that, while his eye was filled and his ear fed, his taste, his
keen zest, his lively intelligence, were not equally consulted and
regaled. It is certain that, restless and exacting as seemed the
demand on his attention, he yielded courteously all that was required:
his manner showed neither pique nor coolness: Ginevra was his
neighbour, and to her, during dinner, he almost