hounded on the people to hiss
you, he did quite right. You deserve popular execration; for a worse
man, a harder master, a more brutal brother than you are has seldom
existed."
"Sirrah! sirrah!" reiterated Crimsworth; and to complete his apostrophe,
he cracked the whip straight over my head.
A minute sufficed to wrest it from him, break it in two pieces, and
throw it under the grate. He made a headlong rush at me, which I evaded,
and said--
"Touch me, and I'll have you up before the nearest magistrate."
Men like Crimsworth, if firmly and calmly resisted, always abate
something of their exorbitant insolence; he had no mind to be brought
before a magistrate, and I suppose he saw I meant what I said. After
an odd and long stare at me, at once bull-like and amazed, he seemed
to bethink himself that, after all, his money gave him sufficient
superiority over a beggar like me, and that he had in his hands a surer
and more dignified mode of revenge than the somewhat hazardous one of
personal chastisement.
"Take your hat," said he. "Take what belongs to you, and go out at
that door; get away to your parish, you pauper: beg, steal, starve, get
transported, do what you like; but at your peril venture again into
my sight! If ever I hear of your setting foot on an inch of ground
belonging to me, I'll hire a man to cane you."
"It is not likely you'll have the chance; once off your premises, what
temptation can I have to return to them? I leave a prison, I leave a
tyrant; I leave what is worse than the worst that can lie before me, so
no fear of my coming back."
"Go, or I'll make you!" exclaimed Crimsworth.
I walked deliberately to my desk, took out such of its contents as were
my own property, put them in my pocket, locked the desk, and placed the
key on the top.
"What are you abstracting from that desk?" demanded the millowner.
"Leave all behind in its place, or I'll send for a policeman to search
you."
"Look sharp about it, then," said I, and I took down my hat, drew on my
gloves, and walked leisurely out of the counting-house--walked out of it
to enter it no more.
I recollect that when the mill-bell rang the dinner hour, before Mr.
Crimsworth entered, and the scene above related took place, I had had
rather a sharp appetite, and had been waiting somewhat impatiently to
hear the signal of feeding time. I forgot it now, however; the images
of potatoes and roast mutton were effaced from my mind by the stir and
tumult which the transaction of the last half-hour had there excited. I
only thought of walking, that the action of my muscles might harmonize
with the action of my nerves; and walk I did, fast and far. How could
I do otherwise? A load was lifted off my heart; I felt light and
liberated. I had got away from Bigben Close without a breach of
resolution; without injury to my self-respect. I had not forced
circumstances; circumstances had freed me. Life was again open to me;
no longer was its horizon limited by the high black wall surrounding
Crimsworth's mill. Two hours had elapsed before my sensations had so far
subsided as to leave me calm enough to remark for what wider and clearer
boundaries I had exchanged that sooty girdle. When I did look up, lo!
straight before me lay Grovetown, a village of villas about five miles
out of X----. The short winter day, as I perceived from the far-declined
sun, was already approaching its close; a chill frost-mist was rising
from the river on which X---- stands, and along whose banks the road I
had taken lay; it dimmed the earth, but did not obscure the clear icy
blue of the January sky. There was a great stillness near and far; the
time of the day favoured tranquillity, as the people were all employed
within-doors, the hour of evening release from the factories not being
yet arrived; a sound of full-flowing water alone pervaded the air, for
the river was deep and abundant, swelled by the melting of a late snow.
I stood awhile, leaning over a wall; and looking down at the current:
I watched the rapid rush of its waves. I desired memory to take a clear
and permanent impression of the scene, and treasure it for future years.
Grovetown church clock struck four; looking up, I beheld the last of
that day's sun, glinting red through the leafless boughs of some
very old oak trees surrounding the church--its light coloured and
characterized the picture as I wished. I paused yet a moment, till the
sweet, slow sound of the bell had quite died out of the air; then ear,
eye and feeling satisfied, I quitted the wall and once more turned my
face towards X----.
CHAPTER VI.
I RE-ENTERED the town a hungry man; the dinner I had forgotten recurred
seductively to my recollection; and it was with a quick step and sharp
appetite I ascended the narrow street leading to my lodgings. It was
dark when I opened the front door and walked into the house. I wondered
how my fire would be; the night was cold, and I shuddered at the
prospect of a grate full of sparkless cinders. To my joyful surprise,
I found, on entering my sitting-room, a good fire and a clean hearth.
I had hardly noticed this phenomenon, when I became aware of another
subject for wonderment; the chair I usually occupied near the hearth was
already filled; a person sat there with his arms folded on his chest,
and his legs stretched out on the rug. Short-sighted as I am, doubtful
as was the gleam of the firelight, a moment's examination enabled me to
recognize in this person my acquaintance, Mr. Hunsden. I could not of
course be much pleased to see him, considering the manner in which I had
parted from him the night before, and as I walked to the hearth, stirred
the fire, and said coolly, "Good evening," my demeanour evinced as
little cordiality as I felt; yet I wondered in my own mind what had
brought him there; and I wondered, also, what motives had induced him to
interfere so actively between me and Edward; it was to him, it appeared,
that I owed my welcome dismissal; still I could not bring myself to
ask