unlike that of her Flemish companions, I have little more to say
respecting it; I can pronounce no encomiums on her beauty, for she was
not beautiful; nor offer condolence on her plainness, for neither
was she plain; a careworn character of forehead, and a corresponding
moulding of the mouth, struck me with a sentiment resembling surprise,
but these traits would probably have passed unnoticed by any less
crotchety observer.
Now, reader, though I have spent more than a page in describing Mdlle.
Henri, I know well enough that I have left on your mind's eye no
distinct picture of her; I have not painted her complexion, nor her
eyes, nor her hair, nor even drawn the outline of her shape. You cannot
tell whether her nose was aquiline or retrousse, whether her chin was
long or short, her face square or oval; nor could I the first day,
and it is not my intention to communicate to you at once a knowledge I
myself gained by little and little.
I gave a short exercise: which they all wrote down. I saw the new pupil
was puzzled at first with the novelty of the form and language; once
or twice she looked at me with a sort of painful solicitude, as not
comprehending at all what I meant; then she was not ready when the
others were, she could not write her phrases so fast as they did; I
would not help her, I went on relentless. She looked at me; her eye
said most plainly, "I cannot follow you." I disregarded the appeal, and,
carelessly leaning back in my chair, glancing from time to time with a
NONCHALANT air out of the window, I dictated a little faster. On looking
towards her again, I perceived her face clouded with embarrassment, but
she was still writing on most diligently; I paused a few seconds; she
employed the interval in hurriedly re-perusing what she had written, and
shame and discomfiture were apparent in her countenance; she evidently
found she had made great nonsense of it. In ten minutes more the
dictation was complete, and, having allowed a brief space in which to
correct it, I took their books; it was with a reluctant hand Mdlle.
Henri gave up hers, but, having once yielded it to my possession, she
composed her anxious face, as if, for the present she had resolved to
dismiss regret, and had made up her mind to be thought unprecedentedly
stupid. Glancing over her exercise, I found that several lines had been
omitted, but what was written contained very few faults; I instantly
inscribed "Bon" at the bottom of the page, and returned it to her; she
smiled, at first incredulously, then as if reassured, but did not
lift her eyes; she could look at me, it seemed, when perplexed and
bewildered, but not when gratified; I thought that scarcely fair.
CHAPTER XV.
SOME time elapsed before I again gave a lesson in the first class; the
holiday of Whitsuntide occupied three days, and on the fourth it was the
turn of the second division to receive my instructions. As I made
the transit of the CARRE, I observed, as usual, the band of sewers
surrounding Mdlle. Henri; there were only about a dozen of them, but
they made as much noise as might have sufficed for fifty; they seemed
very little under her control; three or four at once assailed her with
importunate requirements; she looked harassed, she demanded silence, but
in vain. She saw me, and I read in her eye pain that a stranger should
witness the insubordination of her pupils; she seemed to entreat
order--her prayers were useless; then I remarked that she compressed
her lips and contracted her brow; and her countenance, if I read
it correctly, said--"I have done my best; I seem to merit blame
notwithstanding; blame me then who will." I passed on; as I closed the
school-room door, I heard her say, suddenly and sharply, addressing one
of the eldest and most turbulent of the lot--
"Amelie Mullenberg, ask me no question, and request of me no assistance,
for a week to come; during that space of time I will neither speak to
you nor help you."
The words were uttered with emphasis--nay, with vehemence--and a
comparative silence followed; whether the calm was permanent, I know
not; two doors now closed between me and the CARRE.
Next day was appropriated to the first class; on my arrival, I found the
directress seated, as usual, in a chair between the two estrades, and
before her was standing Mdlle. Henri, in an attitude (as it seemed to
me) of somewhat reluctant attention. The directress was knitting and
talking at the same time. Amidst the hum of a large school-room, it was
easy so to speak in the ear of one person, as to be heard by that person
alone, and it was thus Mdlle. Reuter parleyed with her teacher. The face
of the latter was a little flushed, not a little troubled; there was
vexation in it, whence resulting I know not, for the directress looked
very placid indeed; she could not be scolding in such gentle whispers,
and with so equable a mien; no, it was presently proved that her
discourse had been of the most friendly tendency, for I heard the
closing words--
"C'est assez, ma bonne amie; a present je ne veux pas vous retenir
davantage."
Without reply, Mdlle. Henri turned away; dissatisfaction was plainly
evinced in her face, and a smile, slight and brief, but bitter,
distrustful, and, I thought, scornful, curled her lip as she took her
place in the class; it was a secret, involuntary smile, which lasted but
a second; an air of depression succeeded, chased away presently by one
of attention and interest, when I gave the word for all the pupils to
take their reading-books. In general I hated the reading-lesson, it
was such a torture to the ear to listen to their uncouth mouthing of
my native tongue, and no effort of example or precept on my part ever
seemed to effect the slightest improvement in their accent. To-day,
each in her appropriate key, lisped, stuttered, mumbled, and jabbered as
usual; about fifteen had racked me in turn, and my auricular nerve was
expecting with resignation the discords of the sixteenth, when a full,
though low voice, read out, in clear correct English.
"On his way to Perth, the king was met by a Highland woman, calling
herself a prophetess; she stood at the