this very tree, beneath the ground which now
bears us."
"And that in former days a nun's ghost used to come and go here."
"Monsieur, what if it comes and goes here still?"
"Something comes and goes here: there is a shape frequenting this
house by night, different to any forms that show themselves by day. I
have indisputably seen a something, more than once; and to me its
conventual weeds were a strange sight, saying more than they can do to
any other living being. A nun!"
"Monsieur, I, too, have seen it."
"I anticipated that. Whether this nun be flesh and blood, or something
that remains when blood is dried, and flesh is wasted, her business is
as much with you as with me, probably. Well, I mean to make it out; it
has baffled me so far, but I mean to follow up the mystery. I mean--"
Instead of telling what he meant, he raised his head suddenly; I made
the same movement in the same instant; we both looked to one point--
the high tree shadowing the great berceau, and resting some of its
boughs on the roof of the first classe. There had been a strange and
inexplicable sound from that quarter, as if the arms of that tree had
swayed of their own motion, and its weight of foliage had rushed and
crushed against the massive trunk. Yes; there scarce stirred a breeze,
and that heavy tree was convulsed, whilst the feathery shrubs stood
still. For some minutes amongst the wood and leafage a rending and
heaving went on. Dark as it was, it seemed to me that something more
solid than either night-shadow, or branch-shadow, blackened out of the
boles. At last the struggle ceased. What birth succeeded this travail?
What Dryad was born of these throes? We watched fixedly. A sudden bell
rang in the house--the prayer-bell. Instantly into our alley there
came, out of the berceau, an apparition, all black and white. With a
sort of angry rush-close, close past our faces--swept swiftly the very
NUN herself! Never had I seen her so clearly. She looked tall of
stature, and fierce of gesture. As she went, the wind rose sobbing;
the rain poured wild and cold; the whole night seemed to feel her.
CHAPTER XXXII.
THE FIRST LETTER.
Where, it becomes time to inquire, was Paulina Mary? How fared my
intercourse with the sumptuous Hotel Crecy? That intercourse had, for
an interval, been suspended by absence; M. and Miss de Bassompierre
had been travelling, dividing some weeks between the provinces and
capital of France. Chance apprised me of their return very shortly
after it took place.
I was walking one mild afternoon on a quiet boulevard, wandering
slowly on, enjoying the benign April sun, and some thoughts not
unpleasing, when I saw before me a group of riders, stopping as if
they had just encountered, and exchanging greetings in the midst of
the broad, smooth, linden-bordered path; on one side a middle-aged
gentleman and young lady, on the other--a young and handsome man. Very
graceful was the lady's mien, choice her appointments, delicate and
stately her whole aspect. Still, as I looked, I felt they were known
to me, and, drawing a little nearer, I fully recognised them all: the
Count Home de Bassompierre, his daughter, and Dr. Graham Bretton.
How animated was Graham's face! How true, how warm, yet how retiring
the joy it expressed! This was the state of things, this the
combination of circumstances, at once to attract and enchain, to
subdue and excite Dr. John. The pearl he admired was in itself of
great price and truest purity, but he was not the man who, in
appreciating the gem, could forget its setting. Had he seen Paulina
with the same youth, beauty, and grace, but on foot, alone, unguarded,
and in simple attire, a dependent worker, a demi-grisette, he would
have thought her a pretty little creature, and would have loved with
his eye her movements and her mien, but it required other than this to
conquer him as he was now vanquished, to bring him safe under dominion
as now, without loss, and even with gain to his manly honour, one saw
that he was reduced; there was about Dr. John all the man of the
world; to satisfy himself did not suffice; society must approve--the
world must admire what he did, or he counted his measures false and
futile. In his victrix he required all that was here visible--the
imprint of high cultivation, the consecration of a careful and
authoritative protection, the adjuncts that Fashion decrees, Wealth
purchases, and Taste adjusts; for these conditions his spirit
stipulated ere it surrendered: they were here to the utmost fulfilled;
and now, proud, impassioned, yet fearing, he did homage to Paulina as
his sovereign. As for her, the smile of feeling, rather than of
conscious power, slept soft in her eyes.
They parted. He passed me at speed, hardly feeling the earth he
skimmed, and seeing nothing on either hand. He looked very handsome;
mettle and purpose were roused in him fully.
"Papa, there is Lucy!" cried a musical, friendly voice. "Lucy, dear
Lucy--_do_ come here!"
I hastened to her. She threw back her veil, and stooped from her
saddle to kiss me.
"I was coming to see you to-morrow," said she; "but now to-morrow you
will come and see me."
She named the hour, and I promised compliance.
The morrow's evening found me with her--she and I shut into her own
room. I had not seen her since that occasion when her claims were
brought into comparison with those of Ginevra Fanshawe, and had so
signally prevailed; she had much to tell me of her travels in the
interval. A most animated, rapid speaker was she in such a tete-a-
tete, a most lively describer; yet with her artless diction and clear
soft voice, she never seemed to speak too fast or to say too much. My
own attention I think would not soon have flagged, but by-and-by, she
herself seemed to need some change of subject; she hastened to wind up
her narrative briefly. Yet why she terminated with so concise an
abridgment did not immediately appear; silence followed--a restless
silence, not without symptoms of abstraction. Then, turning to me, in
a diffident, half-appealing voice--"Lucy--"
"Well, I am at your side."
"Is my cousin Ginevra still at Madame Beck's?"
"Your cousin is still there; you must be longing to see her."
"No--not much."
"You want to invite her to spend another evening?"
"No... I suppose she still talks