With all his good looks and good-nature, he
was not perfect; he must have been very imperfect if he roguishly
encouraged aims he never intended to be successful. But did he not
intend them to be successful? People said he had no money, that he was
wholly dependent upon his profession. Madame--though perhaps some
fourteen years his senior--was yet the sort of woman never to grow
old, never to wither, never to break down. They certainly were on good
terms. _He_ perhaps was not in love; but how many people ever
_do_ love, or at least marry for love, in this world. We waited
the end.
For what _he_ waited, I do not know, nor for what he watched; but
the peculiarity of his manner, his expectant, vigilant, absorbed,
eager look, never wore off: it rather intensified. He had never been
quite within the compass of my penetration, and I think he ranged
farther and farther beyond it.
One morning little Georgette had been more feverish and consequently
more peevish; she was crying, and would not be pacified. I thought a
particular draught ordered, disagreed with her, and I doubted whether
it ought to be continued; I waited impatiently for the doctor's coming
in order to consult him.
The door-bell rang, he was admitted; I felt sure of this, for I heard
his voice addressing the portress. It was his custom to mount straight
to the nursery, taking about three degrees of the staircase at once,
and coming upon us like a cheerful surprise. Five minutes elapsed--
ten--and I saw and heard nothing of him. What could he be doing?
Possibly waiting in the corridor below. Little Georgette still piped
her plaintive wail, appealing to me by her familiar term, "Minnie,
Minnie, me very poorly!" till my heart ached. I descended to ascertain
why he did not come. The corridor was empty. Whither was he vanished?
Was he with Madame in the _salle-a-manger?_ Impossible: I had
left her but a short time since, dressing in her own chamber. I
listened. Three pupils were just then hard at work practising in three
proximate rooms--the dining-room and the greater and lesser drawing-
rooms, between which and the corridor there was but the portress's
cabinet communicating with the salons, and intended originally for a
boudoir. Farther off, at a fourth instrument in the oratory, a whole
class of a dozen or more were taking a singing lesson, and just then
joining in a "barcarole" (I think they called it), whereof I yet
remember these words "fraiche," "brise," and "Venise." Under these
circumstances, what could I hear? A great deal, certainly; had it only
been to the purpose.
Yes; I heard a giddy treble laugh in the above-mentioned little
cabinet, close by the door of which I stood--that door half-unclosed;
a man's voice in a soft, deep, pleading tone, uttered some, words,
whereof I only caught the adjuration, "For God's sake!" Then, after a
second's pause, forth issued Dr. John, his eye full shining, but not
with either joy or triumph; his fair English cheek high-coloured; a
baffled, tortured, anxious, and yet a tender meaning on his brow.
The open door served me as a screen; but had I been full in his way, I
believe he would have passed without seeing me. Some mortification,
some strong vexation had hold of his soul: or rather, to write my
impressions now as I received them at the time I should say some
sorrow, some sense of injustice. I did not so much think his pride was
hurt, as that his affections had been wounded--cruelly wounded, it
seemed to me. But who was the torturer? What being in that house had
him so much in her power? Madame I believed to be in her chamber; the
room whence he had stepped was dedicated to the portress's sole use;
and she, Rosine Matou, an unprincipled though pretty little French
grisette, airy, fickle, dressy, vain, and mercenary--it was not,
surely, to _her_ hand he owed the ordeal through which he seemed
to have passed?
But while I pondered, her voice, clear, though somewhat sharp, broke
out in a lightsome French song, trilling through the door still ajar:
I glanced in, doubting my senses. There at the table she sat in a
smart dress of "jaconas rose," trimming a tiny blond cap: not a living
thing save herself was in the room, except indeed some gold fish in a
glass globe, some flowers in pots, and a broad July sunbeam.
Here was a problem: but I must go up-stairs to ask about the medicine.
Dr. John sat in a chair at Georgette's bedside; Madame stood before
him; the little patient had been examined and soothed, and now lay
composed in her crib. Madame Beck, as I entered, was discussing the
physician's own health, remarking on some real or fancied change in
his looks, charging him with over-work, and recommending rest and
change of air. He listened good-naturedly, but with laughing
indifference, telling her that she was "trop bonne," and that he felt
perfectly well. Madame appealed to me--Dr. John following her movement
with a slow glance which seemed to express languid surprise at
reference being made to a quarter so insignificant.
"What do you think, Miss Lucie?" asked Madame. "Is he not paler and
thinner?"
It was very seldom that I uttered more than monosyllables in Dr.
John's presence; he was the kind of person with whom I was likely ever
to remain the neutral, passive thing he thought me. Now, however, I
took licence to answer in a phrase: and a phrase I purposely made
quite significant.
"He looks ill at this moment; but perhaps it is owing to some
temporary cause: Dr. John may have been vexed or harassed." I cannot
tell how he took this speech, as I never sought his face for
information. Georgette here began to ask me in her broken English if
she might have a glass of _eau sucree_. I answered her in
English. For the first time, I fancy, he noticed that I spoke his
language; hitherto he had always taken me for a foreigner, addressing
me as "Mademoiselle," and giving in French the requisite directions
about the children's treatment. He seemed on the point of making a
remark; but thinking better of it, held his tongue.
Madame recommenced advising him; he shook his head, laughing, rose and
bid her good-morning, with courtesy, but still with the regardless air
of one whom too much unsolicited attention was surfeiting and
spoiling.
When he was gone, Madame dropped into the chair he