can befall her as a daughter-in-law."
"If I don't, it is not for want of having that same calamity held over
my head: you have threatened me with it for the last ten years.
'Mamma, I am going to be married soon!' was the cry before you were
well out of jackets."
"But, mother, one of these days it will be realized. All of a sudden,
when you think you are most secure, I shall go forth like Jacob or
Esau, or any other patriarch, and take me a wife: perhaps of these
which are of the daughters of the land."
"At your peril, John Graham! that is all."
"This mother of mine means me to be an old bachelor. What a jealous
old lady it is! But now just look at that splendid creature in the
pale blue satin dress, and hair of paler brown, with 'reflets satines'
as those of her robe. Would you not feel proud, mamma, if I were to
bring that goddess home some day, and introduce her to you as Mrs.
Bretton, junior?"
"You will bring no goddess to La Terrasse: that little chateau will
not contain two mistresses; especially if the second be of the height,
bulk, and circumference of that mighty doll in wood and wax, and kid
and satin."
"Mamma, she would fill your blue chair so admirably!"
"Fill my chair? I defy the foreign usurper! a rueful chair should it
be for her: but hush, John Graham! Hold your tongue, and use your
eyes."
During the above skirmish, the hall, which, I had thought, seemed full
at the entrance, continued to admit party after party, until the
semicircle before the stage presented one dense mass of heads, sloping
from floor to ceiling. The stage, too, or rather the wide temporary
platform, larger than any stage, desert half an hour since, was now
overflowing with life; round two grand pianos, placed about the
centre, a white flock of young girls, the pupils of the Conservatoire,
had noiselessly poured. I had noticed their gathering, while Graham
and his mother were engaged in discussing the belle in blue satin, and
had watched with interest the process of arraying and marshalling
them. Two gentlemen, in each of whom I recognised an acquaintance,
officered this virgin troop. One, an artistic-looking man, bearded,
and with long hair, was a noted pianiste, and also the first music-
teacher in Villette; he attended twice a week at Madame Beck's
pensionnat, to give lessons to the few pupils whose parents were rich
enough to allow their daughters the privilege of his instructions;
his name was M. Josef Emanuel, and he was half-brother to M. Paul:
which potent personage was now visible in the person of the second
gentleman.
M. Paul amused me; I smiled to myself as I watched him, he seemed so
thoroughly in his element--standing conspicuous in presence of a wide
and grand assemblage, arranging, restraining, over-aweing about one
hundred young ladies. He was, too, so perfectly in earnest--so
energetic, so intent, and, above all, so of the foreigners then
resident in Villette. These took possession of the crimson benches;
the ladies were seated; most of the men remained standing: their sable
rank, lining the background, looked like a dark foil to the splendour
displayed in front. Nor was this splendour without varying light and
shade and gradation: the middle distance was filled with matrons in
velvets and satins, in plumes and gems; the benches in the foreground,
to the Queen's right hand, seemed devoted exclusively to young girls,
the flower--perhaps, I should rather say, the bud--of Villette
aristocracy. Here were no jewels, no head-dresses, no velvet pile or
silken sheen purity, simplicity, and aerial grace reigned in that
virgin band. Young heads simply braided, and fair forms (I was going
to write _sylph_ forms, but that would have been quite untrue:
several of these "jeunes filles," who had not numbered more than
sixteen or seventeen years, boasted contours as robust and solid as
those of a stout Englishwoman of five-and-twenty)--fair forms robed in
white, or pale rose, or placid blue, suggested thoughts of heaven and
angels. I knew a couple, at least, of these "rose et blanche"
specimens of humanity. Here was a pair of Madame Beck's late pupils--
Mesdemoiselles Mathilde and Angelique: pupils who, during their last
year at school, ought to have been in the first class, but whose
brains never got them beyond the second division. In English, they had
been under my own charge, and hard work it was to get them to
translate rationally a page of _The Vicar of Wakefield_. Also
during three months I had one of them for my vis-a-vis at table, and
the quantity of household bread, butter, and stewed fruit, she would
habitually consume at "second dejeuner" was a real world's wonder--to
be exceeded only by the fact of her actually pocketing slices she
could not eat. Here be truths--wholesome truths, too.
I knew another of these seraphs--the prettiest, or, at any rate, the
least demure and hypocritical looking of the lot: she was seated by
the daughter of an English peer, also an honest, though haughty-
looking girl: both had entered in the suite of the British embassy.
She (_i.e._ my acquaintance) had a slight, pliant figure, not at
all like the forms of the foreign damsels: her hair, too, was not
close-braided, like a shell or a skull-cap of satin; it looked
_like_ hair, and waved from her head, long, curled, and flowing.
She chatted away volubly, and seemed full of a light-headed sort of
satisfaction with herself and her position. I did not look at Dr.
Bretton; but I knew that he, too, saw Ginevra Fanshawe: he had become
so quiet, he answered so briefly his mother's remarks, he so often
suppressed a sigh. Why should he sigh? He had confessed a taste for
the pursuit of love under difficulties; here was full gratification
for that taste. His lady-love beamed upon him from a sphere above his
own: he could not come near her; he was not certain that he could win
from her a look. I watched to see if she would so far favour him. Our
seat was not far from the crimson benches; we must inevitably be seen
thence, by eyes so quick and roving as Miss Fanshawe's, and very soon
those optics of hers were upon us: at least, upon Dr. and Mrs.
Bretton. I kept rather in the shade and out of sight, not wishing to
be immediately recognised: she looked quite steadily at Dr.