about being married?"
"Not to any one you care for."
"But of course she still thinks of Dr. Bretton? She cannot have
changed her mind on that point, because it was so fixed two months
ago."
"Why, you know, it does not matter. You saw the terms on which they
stood."
"There was a little misunderstanding that evening, certainly; does she
seem unhappy?"
"Not she. To change the subject. Have you heard or seen nothing of, or
from. Graham during your absence?"
"Papa had letters from him once or twice about business, I think. He
undertook the management of some affair which required attention while
we were away. Dr. Bretton seems to respect papa, and to have pleasure
in obliging him."
"Yes: you met him yesterday on the boulevard; you would be able to
judge from his aspect that his friends need not be painfully anxious
about his health?"
"Papa seems to have thought with you. I could not help smiling. He is
not particularly observant, you know, because he is often thinking of
other things than what pass before his eyes; but he said, as Dr.
Bretton rode away, `Really it does a man good to see the spirit and
energy of that boy.' He called Dr. Bretton a boy; I believe he almost
thinks him so, just as he thinks me a little girl; he was not speaking
to me, but dropped that remark to himself. Lucy...."
Again fell the appealing accent, and at the same instant she left her
chair, and came and sat on the stool at my feet.
I liked her. It is not a declaration I have often made concerning my
acquaintance, in the course of this book: the reader will bear with it
for once. Intimate intercourse, close inspection, disclosed in Paulina
only what was delicate, intelligent, and sincere; therefore my regard
for her lay deep. An admiration more superficial might have been more
demonstrative; mine, however, was quiet.
"What have you to ask of Lucy?" said I; "be brave, and speak out"
But there was no courage in her eye; as it met mine, it fell; and
there was no coolness on her cheek--not a transient surface-blush, but
a gathering inward excitement raised its tint and its temperature.
"Lucy, I _do_ wish to know your thoughts of Dr. Bretton. Do,
_do_ give me your real opinion of his character, his disposition."
"His character stands high, and deservedly high."
"And his disposition? Tell me about his disposition," she urged; "you
know him well."
"I know him pretty well."
"You know his home-side. You have seen him with his mother; speak of
him as a son."
"He is a fine-hearted son; his mother's comfort and hope, her pride
and pleasure."
She held my hand between hers, and at each favourable word gave it a
little caressing stroke.
"In what other way is he good, Lucy?"
"Dr. Bretton is benevolent--humanely disposed towards all his race,
Dr. Bretton would have benignity for the lowest savage, or the worst
criminal."
"I heard some gentlemen, some of papa's friends, who were talking
about him, say the same. They say many of the poor patients at the
hospitals, who tremble before some pitiless and selfish surgeons,
welcome him."
"They are right; I have witnessed as much. He once took me over a
hospital; I saw how he was received: your father's friends are right."
The softest gratitude animated her eye as she lifted it a moment. She
had yet more to say, but seemed hesitating about time and place. Dusk
was beginning to reign; her parlour fire already glowed with twilight
ruddiness; but I thought she wished the room dimmer, the hour later.
"How quiet and secluded we feel here!" I remarked, to reassure her.
"Do we? Yes; it is a still evening, and I shall not be called down to
tea; papa is dining out."
Still holding my hand, she played with the fingers unconsciously,
dressed them, now in her own rings, and now circled them with a twine
of her beautiful hair; she patted the palm against her hot cheek, and
at last, having cleared a voice that was naturally liquid as a lark's,
she said:--
"You must think it rather strange that I should talk so much about Dr.
Bretton, ask so many questions, take such an interest, but--".
"Not at all strange; perfectly natural; you like him."
"And if I did," said she, with slight quickness, "is that a reason why
I should talk? I suppose you think me weak, like my cousin Ginevra?"
"If I thought you one whit like Madame Ginevra, I would not sit here
waiting for your communications. I would get up, walk at my ease about
the room, and anticipate all you had to say by a round lecture. Go
on."
"I mean to go on," retorted she; "what else do you suppose I mean to
do?"
And she looked and spoke--the little Polly of Bretton--petulant,
sensitive.
"If," said she, emphatically, "if I liked Dr. John till I was fit to
die for liking him, that alone could not license me to be otherwise
than dumb--dumb as the grave--dumb as you, Lucy Snowe--you know it--
and you know you would despise me if I failed in self-control, and
whined about some rickety liking that was all on my side."
"It is true I little respect women or girls who are loquacious either
in boasting the triumphs, or bemoaning the mortifications, of
feelings. But as to you, Paulina, speak, for I earnestly wish to hear
you. Tell me all it will give you pleasure or relief to tell: I ask no
more."
"Do you care for me, Lucy?"
"Yes, I do, Paulina."
"And I love you. I had an odd content in being with you even when I
was a little, troublesome, disobedient girl; it was charming to me
then to lavish on you my naughtiness and whims. Now you are acceptable
to me, and I like to talk with and trust you. So listen, Lucy."
And she settled herself, resting against my arm--resting gently, not
with honest Mistress Fanshawe's fatiguing and selfish weight.
"A few minutes since you asked whether we had not heard from Graham
during our absence, and I said there were two letters for papa on
business; this was true, but I did not tell you all."
"You evaded?"
"I shuffled and equivocated, you know. However, I am going to speak
the truth now; it is getting darker; one can talk at one's ease. Papa
often lets me open the letter-bag and give him out the contents. One
morning, about three weeks ago, you don't know