sort of friend and confidant. She teased
me with a thousand vapid complaints about school-quarrels and
household economy: the cookery was not to her taste; the people about
her, teachers and pupils, she held to be despicable, because they were
foreigners. I bore with her abuse of the Friday's salt fish and hard
eggs--with her invective against the soup, the bread, the coffee--with
some patience for a time; but at last, wearied by iteration, I turned
crusty, and put her to rights: a thing I ought to have done in the
very beginning, for a salutary setting down always agreed with her.
Much longer had I to endure her demands on me in the way of work. Her
wardrobe, so far as concerned articles of external wear, was well and
elegantly supplied; but there were other habiliments not so carefully
provided: what she had, needed frequent repair. She hated needle-
drudgery herself, and she would bring her hose, &c. to me in heaps, to
be mended. A compliance of some weeks threatening to result in the
establishment of an intolerable bore--I at last distinctly told her
she must make up her mind to mend her own garments. She cried on
receiving this information, and accused me of having ceased to be her
friend; but I held by my decision, and let the hysterics pass as they
could.
Notwithstanding these foibles, and various others needless to mention
--but by no means of a refined or elevating character--how pretty she
was! How charming she looked, when she came down on a sunny Sunday
morning, well-dressed and well-humoured, robed in pale lilac silk, and
with her fair long curls reposing on her white shoulders. Sunday was a
holiday which she always passed with friends resident in town; and
amongst these friends she speedily gave me to understand was one who
would fain become something more. By glimpses and hints it was shown
me, and by the general buoyancy of her look and manner it was ere long
proved, that ardent admiration--perhaps genuine love--was at her
command. She called her suitor "Isidore:" this, however, she intimated
was not his real name, but one by which it pleased her to baptize him
--his own, she hinted, not being "very pretty." Once, when she had been
bragging about the vehemence of "Isidore's" attachment, I asked if she
loved him in return.
"Comme cela," said she: "he is handsome, and he loves me to
distraction, so that I am well amused. Ca suffit."
Finding that she carried the thing on longer than, from her very
fickle tastes, I had anticipated, I one day took it upon me to make
serious inquiries as to whether the gentleman was such as her parents,
and especially her uncle--on whom, it appeared, she was dependent--
would be likely to approve. She allowed that this was very doubtful,
as she did not believe "Isidore" had much money.
"Do you encourage him?" I asked.
"Furieusement sometimes," said she.
"Without being certain that you will be permitted to marry him?"
"Oh, how dowdyish you are! I don't want to be married. I am too
young."
"But if he loves you as much as you say, and yet it comes to nothing
in the end, he will be made miserable."
"Of course he will break his heart. I should be shocked and,
disappointed if he didn't."
"I wonder whether this M. Isidore is a fool?" said I.
"He is, about me; but he is wise in other things, a ce qu'on dit. Mrs.
Cholmondeley considers him extremely clever: she says he will push
his way by his talents; all I know is, that he does little more than sigh
in my presence, and that I can wind him round my little finger."
Wishing to get a more definite idea of this love-stricken M. Isidore;
whose position seemed to me of the least secure, I requested her to
favour me with a personal description; but she could not describe: she
had neither words nor the power of putting them together so as to make
graphic phrases. She even seemed not properly to have noticed him:
nothing of his looks, of the changes in his countenance, had touched
her heart or dwelt in her memory--that he was "beau, mais plutot bel
homme que joli garcon," was all she could assert. My patience would
often have failed, and my interest flagged, in listening to her, but
for one thing. All the hints she dropped, all the details she gave,
went unconsciously to prove, to my thinking, that M. Isidore's homage
was offered with great delicacy and respect. I informed her very
plainly that I believed him much too good for her, and intimated with
equal plainness my impression that she was but a vain coquette. She
laughed, shook her curls from her eyes, and danced away as if I had
paid her a compliment.
Miss Ginevra's school-studies were little better than nominal; there
were but three things she practised in earnest, viz. music, singing,
and dancing; also embroidering the fine cambric handkerchiefs which
she could not afford to buy ready worked: such mere trifles as lessons
in history, geography, grammar, and arithmetic, she left undone, or
got others to do for her. Very much of her time was spent in visiting.
Madame, aware that her stay at school was now limited to a certain
period, which would not be extended whether she made progress or not,
allowed her great licence in this particular. Mrs. Cholmondeley--her
_chaperon_--a gay, fashionable lady, invited her whenever she had
company at her own house, and sometimes took her to evening-parties at
the houses of her acquaintance. Ginevra perfectly approved this mode
of procedure: it had but one inconvenience; she was obliged to be well
dressed, and she had not money to buy variety of dresses. All her
thoughts turned on this difficulty; her whole soul was occupied with
expedients for effecting its solution. It was wonderful to witness the
activity of her otherwise indolent mind on this point, and to see the
much-daring intrepidity to which she was spurred by a sense of
necessity, and the wish to shine.
She begged boldly of Mrs. Cholmondeley--boldly, I say: not with an air
of reluctant shame, but in this strain:--
"My darling Mrs. C., I have nothing in the world fit to wear for your
party next week; you _must_ give me a book-muslin dress, and then
a _ceinture bleu celeste_: _do_--there's an angel! will you?"
The "darling Mrs. C." yielded at first; but finding that applications
increased as they were complied with,