wrapped it in its winding-
sheet, must be interred.
Well, I cleared away the ivy, and found the hole; it was large enough
to receive the jar, and I thrust it deep in. In a tool-shed at the
bottom of the garden, lay the relics of building-materials, left by
masons lately employed to repair a part of the premises. I fetched
thence a slate and some mortar, put the slate on the hollow, secured
it with cement, covered the hole with black mould, and, finally,
replaced the ivy. This done, I rested, leaning against the tree;
lingering, like any other mourner, beside a newly-sodded grave.
The air of the night was very still, but dim with a peculiar mist,
which changed the moonlight into a luminous haze. In this air, or this
mist, there was some quality--electrical, perhaps--which acted in
strange sort upon me. I felt then as I had felt a year ago in England--on
a night when the aurora borealis was streaming and sweeping round
heaven, when, belated in lonely fields, I had paused to watch that
mustering of an army with banners--that quivering of serried lances--
that swift ascent of messengers from below the north star to the dark,
high keystone of heaven's arch. I felt, not happy, far otherwise, but
strong with reinforced strength.
If life be a war, it seemed my destiny to conduct it single-handed. I
pondered now how to break up my winter-quarters--to leave an
encampment where food and forage failed. Perhaps, to effect this
change, another pitched battle must be fought with fortune; if so, I
had a mind to the encounter: too poor to lose, God might destine me to
gain. But what road was open?--what plan available?
On this question I was still pausing, when the moon, so dim hitherto,
seemed to shine out somewhat brighter: a ray gleamed even white before
me, and a shadow became distinct and marked. I looked more narrowly,
to make out the cause of this well-defined contrast appearing a little
suddenly in the obscure alley: whiter and blacker it grew on my eye:
it took shape with instantaneous transformation. I stood about three
yards from a tall, sable-robed, snowy-veiled woman.
Five minutes passed. I neither fled nor shrieked. She was there still.
I spoke.
"Who are you? and why do you come to me?"
She stood mute. She had no face--no features: all below her brow was
masked with a white cloth; but she had eyes, and they viewed me.
I felt, if not brave, yet a little desperate; and desperation will
often suffice to fill the post and do the work of courage. I advanced
one step. I stretched out my hand, for I meant to touch her. She
seemed to recede. I drew nearer: her recession, still silent, became
swift. A mass of shrubs, full-leaved evergreens, laurel and dense yew,
intervened between me and what I followed. Having passed that
obstacle, I looked and saw nothing. I waited. I said,--"If you have
any errand to men, come back and deliver it." Nothing spoke or
re-appeared.
This time there was no Dr. John to whom to have recourse: there was no
one to whom I dared whisper the words, "I have again seen the nun."
* * * * *
Paulina Mary sought my frequent presence in the Rue Crecy. In the old
Bretton days, though she had never professed herself fond of me, my
society had soon become to her a sort of unconscious necessary. I used
to notice that if I withdrew to my room, she would speedily come
trotting after me, and opening the door and peeping in, say, with her
little peremptory accent,--"Come down. Why do you sit here by
yourself? You must come into the parlour."
In the same spirit she urged me now--"Leave the Rue Fossette," she
said, "and come and live with us. Papa would give you far more than
Madame Beck gives you."
Mr. Home himself offered me a handsome sum--thrice my present salary--
if I would accept the office of companion to his daughter. I declined.
I think I should have declined had I been poorer than I was, and with
scantier fund of resource, more stinted narrowness of future prospect.
I had not that vocation. I could teach; I could give lessons; but to
be either a private governess or a companion was unnatural to me.
Rather than fill the former post in any great house, I would
deliberately have taken a housemaid's place, bought a strong pair of
gloves, swept bedrooms and staircases, and cleaned stoves and locks,
in peace and independence. Rather than be a companion, I would have
made shirts and starved.
I was no bright lady's shadow--not Miss de Bassompierre's. Overcast
enough it was my nature often to be; of a subdued habit I was: but the
dimness and depression must both be voluntary--such as kept me docile
at my desk, in the midst of my now well-accustomed pupils in Madame
Beck's fist classe; or alone, at my own bedside, in her dormitory, or
in the alley and seat which were called mine, in her garden: my
qualifications were not convertible, nor adaptable; they could not be
made the foil of any gem, the adjunct of any beauty, the appendage of
any greatness in Christendom. Madame Beck and I, without assimilating,
understood each other well. I was not _her_ companion, nor her
children's governess; she left me free: she tied me to nothing--not to
herself--not even to her interests: once, when she had for a fortnight
been called from home by a near relation's illness, and on her return,
all anxious and full of care about her establishment, lest something
in her absence should have gone wrong finding that matters had
proceeded much as usual, and that there was no evidence of glaring
neglect--she made each of the teachers a present, in acknowledgment of
steadiness. To my bedside she came at twelve o'clock at night, and
told me she had no present for me: "I must make fidelity advantageous
to the St. Pierre," said she; "if I attempt to make it advantageous to
you, there will arise misunderstanding between us--perhaps separation.
One thing, however, I _can_ do to please you--leave you alone
with your liberty: c'est-ce que je ferai." She kept her word. Every
slight shackle she had ever laid on me, she, from that time, with
quiet hand removed. Thus I had pleasure in voluntarily respecting her
rules: gratification in devoting double time, in taking double pains
with the pupils she committed to my charge.
As