nod and smile of approbation. Not that she
thought I was looking well--a point unlikely to engage her interest--
but she considered me dressed "convenablement," "decemment," and la
Convenance et la Decence were the two calm deities of Madame's
worship. She even paused, laid on my shoulder her gloved hand, holding
an embroidered and perfumed handkerchief, and confided to my ear a
sarcasm on the other teachers (whom she had just been complimenting to
their faces). "Nothing so absurd," she said, "as for des femmes mures
'to dress themselves like girls of fifteen'--quant a la. St. Pierre,
elle a l'air d'une vieille coquette qui fait l'ingenue."
Being dressed at least a couple of hours before anybody else, I felt a
pleasure in betaking myself--not to the garden, where servants were
busy propping up long tables, placing seats, and spreading cloths in
readiness for the collation but to the schoolrooms, now empty, quiet,
cool, and clean; their walls fresh stained, their planked floors fresh
scoured and scarce dry; flowers fresh gathered adorning the recesses
in pots, and draperies, fresh hung, beautifying the great windows.
Withdrawing to the first classe, a smaller and neater room than the
others, and taking from the glazed bookcase, of which I kept the key,
a volume whose title promised some interest, I sat down to read. The
glass-door of this "classe," or schoolroom, opened into the large
berceau; acacia-boughs caressed its panes, as they stretched across to
meet a rose-bush blooming by the opposite lintel: in this rose-bush
bees murmured busy and happy. I commenced reading. Just as the stilly
hum, the embowering shade, the warm, lonely calm of my retreat were
beginning to steal meaning from the page, vision from my eyes, and to
lure me along the track of reverie, down into some deep dell of
dreamland--just then, the sharpest ring of the street-door bell to
which that much-tried instrument had ever thrilled, snatched me back
to consciousness.
Now the bell had been ringing all the morning, as workmen, or
servants, or _coiffeurs_, or _tailleuses_, went and came on
their several errands. Moreover, there was good reason to expect it
would ring all the afternoon, since about one hundred externes were
yet to arrive in carriages or fiacres: nor could it be expected to
rest during the evening, when parents and friends would gather
thronging to the play. Under these circumstances, a ring--even a sharp
ring--was a matter of course: yet this particular peal had an accent
of its own, which chased my dream, and startled my book from my knee.
I was stooping to pick up this last, when--firm, fast, straight--right
on through vestibule--along corridor, across carre, through first
division, second division, grand salle--strode a step, quick, regular,
intent. The closed door of the first classe--my sanctuary--offered no
obstacle; it burst open, and a paletot and a bonnet grec filled the
void; also two eyes first vaguely struck upon, and then hungrily dived
into me.
"C'est cela!" said a voice. "Je la connais: c'est l'Anglaise. Tant
pis. Toute Anglaise, et, par consequent, toute begueule qu'elle soit--
elle fera mon affaire, ou je saurai pourquoi."
Then, with a certain stern politeness (I suppose he thought I had not
caught the drift of his previous uncivil mutterings), and in a jargon
the most execrable that ever was heard, "Meess----, play you must: I
am planted there."
"What can I do for you, M. Paul Emanuel?" I inquired: for M. Paul
Emanuel it was, and in a state of no little excitement.
"Play you must. I will not have you shrink, or frown, or make the
prude. I read your skull that night you came; I see your moyens: play
you can; play you must."
"But how, M. Paul? What do you mean?"
"There is no time to be lost," he went on, now speaking in French;
"and let us thrust to the wall all reluctance, all excuses, all
minauderies. You must take a part."
"In the vaudeville?"
"In the vaudeville. You have said it."
I gasped, horror-struck. _What_ did the little man mean?
"Listen!" he said. "The case shall be stated, and you shall then
answer me Yes, or No; and according to your answer shall I ever after
estimate you."
The scarce-suppressed impetus of a most irritable nature glowed in his
cheek, fed with sharp shafts his glances, a nature--the injudicious,
the mawkish, the hesitating, the sullen, the affected, above all, the
unyielding, might quickly render violent and implacable. Silence and
attention was the best balm to apply: I listened.
"The whole matter is going to fail," he began. "Louise Vanderkelkov
has fallen ill--at least so her ridiculous mother asserts; for my part, I
feel sure she might play if she would: it is only good-will that lacks.
She was charged with a _role_, as you know, or do _not_ know--it is
equal: without that _role_ the play is stopped. There are now but a
few hours in which to learn it: not a girl in this school would hear
reason, and accept the task. Forsooth, it is not an interesting, not an
amiable, part; their vile _amour-propre_--that base quality of which
women have so much--would revolt from it. Englishwomen are either
the best or the worst of their sex. Dieu sait que je les deteste comme
la peste, ordinairement" (this between his recreant teeth). "I apply to
an Englishwoman to rescue me. What is her answer--Yes, or No?"
A thousand objections rushed into my mind. The foreign language, the
limited time, the public display... Inclination recoiled, Ability
faltered, Self-respect (that "vile quality") trembled. "Non, non,
non!" said all these; but looking up at M. Paul, and seeing in his
vexed, fiery, and searching eye, a sort of appeal behind all its
menace, my lips dropped the word "oui". For a moment his rigid
countenance relaxed with a quiver of content: quickly bent up again,
however, he went on,--
"Vite a l'ouvrage! Here is the book; here is your _role_: read."
And I read. He did not commend; at some passages he scowled and
stamped. He gave me a lesson: I diligently imitated. It was a
disagreeable part--a man's--an empty-headed fop's. One could put into
it neither heart nor soul: I hated it. The play--a mere trifle--ran
chiefly on the efforts of a brace of rivals to gain the hand of a fair
coquette. One lover was called the "Ours," a good and gallant but
unpolished man, a sort of diamond in the rough; the other was a
butterfly, a talker, and a traitor: and I was to be the butterfly,
talker, and traitor.
I did my