gates their carriage waited to take
them home; the green sweeps of turf spread round them quiet and dim;
the palace rose at a distance, white as a crag on Pentelicus; the
evening star shone above it; a forest of flowering shrubs embalmed the
climate of this spot; the hour was still and sweet; the scene, but for
this group, was solitary.
Paulina sat between the two gentlemen: while they conversed, her
little hands were busy at some work; I thought at first she was
binding a nosegay. No; with the tiny pair of scissors, glittering in
her lap, she had severed spoils from each manly head beside her, and
was now occupied in plaiting together the grey lock and the golden
wave. The plait woven--no silk-thread being at hand to bind it--a
tress of her own hair was made to serve that purpose; she tied it like
a knot, prisoned it in a locket, and laid it on her heart.
"Now," said she, "there is an amulet made, which has virtue to keep
you two always friends. You can never quarrel so long as I wear this."
An amulet was indeed made, a spell framed which rendered enmity
impossible. She was become a bond to both, an influence over each, a
mutual concord. From them she drew her happiness, and what she
borrowed, she, with interest, gave back.
"Is there, indeed, such happiness on earth?" I asked, as I watched the
father, the daughter, the future husband, now united--all blessed and
blessing.
Yes; it is so. Without any colouring of romance, or any exaggeration
of fancy, it is so. Some real lives do--for some certain days or
years--actually anticipate the happiness of Heaven; and, I believe, if
such perfect happiness is once felt by good people (to the wicked it
never comes), its sweet effect is never wholly lost. Whatever trials
follow, whatever pains of sickness or shades of death, the glory
precedent still shines through, cheering the keen anguish, and tinging
the deep cloud.
I will go farther. I _do_ believe there are some human beings so
born, so reared, so guided from a soft cradle to a calm and late
grave, that no excessive suffering penetrates their lot, and no
tempestuous blackness overcasts their journey. And often, these are
not pampered, selfish beings, but Nature's elect, harmonious and
benign; men and women mild with charity, kind agents of God's kind
attributes.
Let me not delay the happy truth. Graham Bretton and Paulina de
Bassompierre were married, and such an agent did Dr. Bretton prove. He
did not with time degenerate; his faults decayed, his virtues ripened;
he rose in intellectual refinement, he won in moral profit: all dregs
filtered away, the clear wine settled bright and tranquil. Bright,
too, was the destiny of his sweet wife. She kept her husband's love,
she aided in his progress--of his happiness she was the corner stone.
This pair was blessed indeed, for years brought them, with great
prosperity, great goodness: they imparted with open hand, yet wisely.
Doubtless they knew crosses, disappointments, difficulties; but these
were well borne. More than once, too, they had to look on Him whose
face flesh scarce can see and live: they had to pay their tribute to
the King of Terrors. In the fulness of years, M. de Bassompierre was
taken: in ripe old age departed Louisa Bretton. Once even there rose a
cry in their halls, of Rachel weeping for her children; but others
sprang healthy and blooming to replace the lost: Dr. Bretton saw
himself live again in a son who inherited his looks and his
disposition; he had stately daughters, too, like himself: these
children he reared with a suave, yet a firm hand; they grew up
according to inheritance and nurture.
In short, I do but speak the truth when I say that these two lives of
Graham and Paulina were blessed, like that of Jacob's favoured son,
with "blessings of Heaven above, blessings of the deep that lies
under." It was so, for God saw that it was good.
CHAPTER XXXVIII.
CLOUD.
But it is not so for all. What then? His will be done, as done it
surely will be, whether we humble ourselves to resignation or not. The
impulse of creation forwards it; the strength of powers, seen and
unseen, has its fulfilment in charge. Proof of a life to come must be
given. In fire and in blood, if needful, must that proof be written.
In fire and in blood do we trace the record throughout nature. In fire
and in blood does it cross our own experience. Sufferer, faint not
through terror of this burning evidence. Tired wayfarer, gird up thy
loins; look upward, march onward. Pilgrims and brother mourners, join
in friendly company. Dark through the wilderness of this world
stretches the way for most of us: equal and steady be our tread; be
our cross our banner. For staff we have His promise, whose "word is
tried, whose way perfect:" for present hope His providence, "who gives
the shield of salvation, whose gentleness makes great;" for final home
His bosom, who "dwells in the height of Heaven;" for crowning prize a
glory, exceeding and eternal. Let us so run that we may obtain: let us
endure hardness as good soldiers; let us finish our course, and keep
the faith, reliant in the issue to come off more than conquerors: "Art
thou not from everlasting mine Holy One? WE SHALL NOT DIE!"
On a Thursday morning we were all assembled in classe, waiting for the
lesson of literature. The hour was come; we expected the master.
The pupils of the first classe sat very still; the cleanly-written
compositions prepared since the last lesson lay ready before them,
neatly tied with ribbon, waiting to be gathered by the hand of the
Professor as he made his rapid round of the desks. The month was July,
the morning fine, the glass-door stood ajar, through it played a fresh
breeze, and plants, growing at the lintel, waved, bent, looked in,
seeming to whisper tidings.
M. Emanuel was not always quite punctual; we scarcely wondered at his
being a little late, but we wondered when the door at last opened and,
instead of him with his swiftness and his fire, there came quietly
upon us the cautious Madame Beck.
She approached M. Paul's desk; she stood before it; she drew round her
the light shawl covering her shoulders; beginning to speak in low, yet
firm tones, and with a fixed gaze, she said, "This morning there