to them, had
it been expedient so to do. She was not now very ambitious of
my admiration--not eagerly desirous of dazzling me; a little
affection--ever so little--pleased her better than all the panegyrics in
the world. Feeling this, I stood a good while behind her, writing on
the margin of her book. I could hardly quit my station or relinquish my
occupation; something retained me bending there, my head very near
hers, and my hand near hers too; but the margin of a copy-book is not an
illimitable space--so, doubtless, the directress thought; and she took
occasion to walk past in order to ascertain by what art I prolonged so
disproportionately the period necessary for filling it. I was obliged to
go. Distasteful effort--to leave what we most prefer!
Frances did not become pale or feeble in consequence of her sedentary
employment; perhaps the stimulus it communicated to her mind
counterbalanced the inaction it imposed on her body. She changed,
indeed, changed obviously and rapidly; but it was for the better. When
I first saw her, her countenance was sunless, her complexion colourless;
she looked like one who had no source of enjoyment, no store of bliss
anywhere in the world; now the cloud had passed from her mien, leaving
space for the dawn of hope and interest, and those feelings rose like a
clear morning, animating what had been depressed, tinting what had been
pale. Her eyes, whose colour I had not at first known, so dim were they
with repressed tears, so shadowed with ceaseless dejection, now, lit by
a ray of the sunshine that cheered her heart, revealed irids of bright
hazel--irids large and full, screened with long lashes; and pupils
instinct with fire. That look of wan emaciation which anxiety or low
spirits often communicates to a thoughtful, thin face, rather long than
round, having vanished from hers; a clearness of skin almost bloom,
and a plumpness almost embonpoint, softened the decided lines of
her features. Her figure shared in this beneficial change; it became
rounder, and as the harmony of her form was complete and her stature of
the graceful middle height, one did not regret (or at least I did not
regret) the absence of confirmed fulness, in contours, still slight,
though compact, elegant, flexible--the exquisite turning of waist,
wrist, hand, foot, and ankle satisfied completely my notions of
symmetry, and allowed a lightness and freedom of movement which
corresponded with my ideas of grace.
Thus improved, thus wakened to life, Mdlle. Henri began to take a
new footing in the school; her mental power, manifested gradually but
steadily, ere long extorted recognition even from the envious; and when
the young and healthy saw that she could smile brightly, converse gaily,
move with vivacity and alertness, they acknowledged in her a sisterhood
of youth and health, and tolerated her as of their kind accordingly.
To speak truth, I watched this change much as a gardener watches the
growth of a precious plant, and I contributed to it too, even as the
said gardener contributes to the development of his favourite. To me it
was not difficult to discover how I could best foster my pupil, cherish
her starved feelings, and induce the outward manifestation of that
inward vigour which sunless drought and blighting blast had hitherto
forbidden to expand. Constancy of attention--a kindness as mute
as watchful, always standing by her, cloaked in the rough garb of
austerity, and making its real nature known only by a rare glance of
interest, or a cordial and gentle word; real respect masked with seeming
imperiousness, directing, urging her actions, yet helping her too, and
that with devoted care: these were the means I used, for these means
best suited Frances' feelings, as susceptible as deep vibrating--her
nature at once proud and shy.
The benefits of my system became apparent also in her altered demeanour
as a teacher; she now took her place amongst her pupils with an air
of spirit and firmness which assured them at once that she meant to be
obeyed--and obeyed she was. They felt they had lost their power over
her. If any girl had rebelled, she would no longer have taken her
rebellion to heart; she possessed a source of comfort they could not
drain, a pillar of support they could not overthrow: formerly, when
insulted, she wept; now, she smiled.
The public reading of one of her devoirs achieved the revelation of her
talents to all and sundry; I remember the subject--it was an emigrant's
letter to his friends at home. It opened with simplicity; some natural
and graphic touches disclosed to the reader the scene of virgin forest
and great, New-World river--barren of sail and flag--amidst which the
epistle was supposed to be indited. The difficulties and dangers that
attend a settler's life, were hinted at; and in the few words said on
that subject, Mdlle. Henri failed not to render audible the voice of
resolve, patience, endeavour. The disasters which had driven him
from his native country were alluded to; stainless honour, inflexible
independence, indestructible self-respect there took the word. Past
days were spoken of; the grief of parting, the regrets of absence, were
touched upon; feeling, forcible and fine, breathed eloquent in every
period. At the close, consolation was suggested; religious faith became
there the speaker, and she spoke well.
The devoir was powerfully written in language at once chaste and choice,
in a style nerved with vigour and graced with harmony.
Mdlle. Reuter was quite sufficiently acquainted with English to
understand it when read or spoken in her presence, though she could
neither speak nor write it herself. During the perusal of this devoir,
she sat placidly busy, her eyes and fingers occupied with the formation
of a "riviere" or open-work hem round a cambric handkerchief; she
said nothing, and her face and forehead, clothed with a mask of purely
negative expression, were as blank of comment as her lips. As neither
surprise, pleasure, approbation, nor interest were evinced in her
countenance, so no more were disdain, envy, annoyance, weariness; if
that inscrutable mien said anything, it was simply this--
"The matter is too trite to excite an emotion, or call forth an
opinion."
As soon as I had done, a hum rose; several of the pupils, pressing round
Mdlle. Henri, began to beset her with compliments; the composed voice of
the directress was now heard:--
"Young ladies, such of you as have cloaks and umbrellas will hasten
to return home before the shower becomes heavier" (it was raining a
little), "the remainder will