for compliments--my dry gibes
pleased her well enough and the more impassible and prosaic my mien,
the more merrily she laughed.
Soon after his marriage, M. de Hamal was persuaded to leave the army
as the surest way of weaning him from certain unprofitable associates
and habits; a post of attache was procured for him, and he and his
young wife went abroad. I thought she would forget me now, but she did
not. For many years, she kept up a capricious, fitful sort of
correspondence. During the first year or two, it was only of herself
and Alfred she wrote; then, Alfred faded in the background; herself
and a certain, new comer prevailed; one Alfred Fanshawe de
Bassompierre de Hamal began to reign in his father's stead. There were
great boastings about this personage, extravagant amplifications upon
miracles of precocity, mixed with vehement objurgations against the
phlegmatic incredulity with which I received them. I didn't know "what
it was to be a mother;" "unfeeling thing that I was, the sensibilities
of the maternal heart were Greek and Hebrew to me," and so on. In due
course of nature this young gentleman took his degrees in teething,
measles, hooping-cough: that was a terrible time for me--the mamma's
letters became a perfect shout of affliction; never woman was so put
upon by calamity: never human being stood in such need of sympathy. I
was frightened at first, and wrote back pathetically; but I soon found
out there was more cry than wool in the business, and relapsed into my
natural cruel insensibility. As to the youthful sufferer, he weathered
each storm like a hero. Five times was that youth "in articulo
mortis," and five times did he miraculously revive.
In the course of years there arose ominous murmurings against Alfred
the First; M. de Bassompierre had to be appealed to, debts had to be
paid, some of them of that dismal and dingy order called "debts of
honour;" ignoble plaints and difficulties became frequent. Under every
cloud, no matter what its nature, Ginevra, as of old, called out
lustily for sympathy and aid. She had no notion of meeting any
distress single-handed. In some shape, from some quarter or other, she
was pretty sure to obtain her will, and so she got on--fighting the
battle of life by proxy, and, on the whole, suffering as little as any
human being I have ever known.
CHAPTER XLI.
FAUBOURG CLOTILDE.
Must I, ere I close, render some account of that Freedom and
Renovation which I won on the fete-night? Must I tell how I and the
two stalwart companions I brought home from the illuminated park bore
the test of intimate acquaintance?
I tried them the very next day. They had boasted their strength loudly
when they reclaimed me from love and its bondage, but upon my
demanding deeds, not words, some evidence of better comfort, some
experience of a relieved life--Freedom excused himself, as for the
present impoverished and disabled to assist; and Renovation never
spoke; he had died in the night suddenly.
I had nothing left for it then but to trust secretly that conjecture
might have hurried me too fast and too far, to sustain the oppressive
hour by reminders of the distorting and discolouring magic of
jealousy. After a short and vain struggle, I found myself brought back
captive to the old rack of suspense, tied down and strained anew.
Shall I yet see him before he goes? Will he bear me in mind? Does he
purpose to come? Will this day--will the next hour bring him? or must
I again assay that corroding pain of long attent--that rude agony of
rupture at the close, that mute, mortal wrench, which, in at once
uprooting hope and doubt, shakes life; while the hand that does the
violence cannot be caressed to pity, because absence interposes her
barrier!
It was the Feast of the Assumption; no school was held. The boarders
and teachers, after attending mass in the morning, were gone a long
walk into the country to take their gouter, or afternoon meal, at some
farm-house. I did not go with them, for now but two days remained ere
the _Paul et Virginie_ must sail, and I was clinging to my last
chance, as the living waif of a wreck clings to his last raft or
cable.
There was some joiners' work to do in the first classe, some bench or
desk to repair; holidays were often turned to account for the
performance of these operations, which could not be executed when the
rooms were filled with pupils. As I sat solitary, purposing to adjourn
to the garden and leave the coast clear, but too listless to fulfil my
own intent, I heard the workmen coming.
Foreign artisans and servants do everything by couples: I believe it
would take two Labassecourien carpenters to drive a nail. While tying
on my bonnet, which had hitherto hung by its ribbons from my idle
hand, I vaguely and momentarily wondered to hear the step of but one
"ouvrier." I noted, too--as captives in dungeons find sometimes dreary
leisure to note the merest trifles--that this man wore shoes, and not
sabots: I concluded that it must be the master-carpenter, coming to
inspect before he sent his journeymen. I threw round me my scarf. He
advanced; he opened the door; my back was towards it; I felt a little
thrill--a curious sensation, too quick and transient to be analyzed. I
turned, I stood in the supposed master-artisan's presence: looking
towards the door-way, I saw it filled with a figure, and my eyes
printed upon my brain the picture of M. Paul.
Hundreds of the prayers with which we weary Heaven bring to the
suppliant no fulfilment. Once haply in life, one golden gift falls
prone in the lap--one boon full and bright, perfect from Fruition's
mint.
M. Emanuel wore the dress in which he probably purposed to travel--a
surtout, guarded with velvet; I thought him prepared for instant
departure, and yet I had understood that two days were yet to run
before the ship sailed. He looked well and cheerful. He looked kind
and benign: he came in with eagerness; he was close to me in one
second; he was all amity. It might be his bridegroom mood which thus
brightened him. Whatever the cause, I could not meet his sunshine with
cloud. If this were my last moment with him, I would not waste it in
forced, unnatural distance. I loved him well--too well not to smite
out of my path even Jealousy