then did
the temples bleed, and the brain thrill to its core.
To-night, I was not so mutinous, nor so miserable. My Sisera lay quiet
in the tent, slumbering; and if his pain ached through his slumbers,
something like an angel--the ideal--knelt near, dropping balm on the
soothed temples, holding before the sealed eyes a magic glass, of
which the sweet, solemn visions were repeated in dreams, and shedding
a reflex from her moonlight wings and robe over the transfixed
sleeper, over the tent threshold, over all the landscape lying
without. Jael, the stern woman; sat apart, relenting somewhat over her
captive; but more prone to dwell on the faithful expectation of Heber
coming home. By which words I mean that the cool peace and dewy
sweetness of the night filled me with a mood of hope: not hope on any
definite point, but a general sense of encouragement and heart-ease.
Should not such a mood, so sweet, so tranquil, so unwonted, have been
the harbinger of good? Alas, no good came of it! I Presently the rude
Real burst coarsely in--all evil grovelling and repellent as she too
often is.
Amid the intense stillness of that pile of stone overlooking the walk,
the trees, the high wall, I heard a sound; a casement [all the windows
here are casements, opening on hinges] creaked. Ere I had time to look
up and mark where, in which story, or by whom unclosed, a tree
overhead shook, as if struck by a missile; some object dropped prone
at my feet.
Nine was striking by St. Jean Baptiste's clock; day was fading, but it
was not dark: the crescent moon aided little, but the deep gilding of
that point in heaven where the sun beamed last, and the crystalline
clearness of a wide space above, sustained the summer twilight; even
in my dark walk I could, by approaching an opening, have managed to
read print of a small type. Easy was it to see then that the missile
was a box, a small box of white and coloured ivory; its loose lid
opened in my hand; violets lay within, violets smothering a closely
folded bit of pink paper, a note, superscribed, "Pour la robe grise."
I wore indeed a dress of French grey.
Good. Was this a billet-doux? A thing I had heard of, but hitherto had
not had the honour of seeing or handling. Was it this sort of
commodity I held between my finger and thumb at this moment?
Scarcely: I did not dream it for a moment. Suitor or admirer my very
thoughts had not conceived. All the teachers had dreams of some lover;
one (but she was naturally of a credulous turn) believed in a future
husband. All the pupils above fourteen knew of some prospective
bridegroom; two or three were already affianced by their parents, and
had been so from childhood: but into the realm of feelings and hopes
which such prospects open, my speculations, far less my presumptions,
had never once had warrant to intrude. If the other teachers went into
town, or took a walk on the boulevards, or only attended mass, they
were very certain (according to the accounts brought back) to meet
with some individual of the "opposite sex," whose rapt, earnest gaze
assured them of their power to strike and to attract. I can't say that
my experience tallied with theirs, in this respect. I went to church
and I took walks, and am very well convinced that nobody minded me.
There was not a girl or woman in the Rue Fossette who could not, and
did not testify to having received an admiring beam from our young
doctor's blue eyes at one time or other. I am obliged, however
humbling it may sound, to except myself: as far as I was concerned,
those blue eyes were guiltless, and calm as the sky, to whose tint
theirs seemed akin. So it came to pass that I heard the others talk,
wondered often at their gaiety, security, and self-satisfaction, but
did not trouble myself to look up and gaze along the path they seemed
so certain of treading. This then was no billet-doux; and it was in
settled conviction to the contrary that I quietly opened it. Thus it
ran--I translate:--
"Angel of my dreams! A thousand, thousand thanks for the promise kept:
scarcely did I venture to hope its fulfilment. I believed you, indeed,
to be half in jest; and then you seemed to think the enterprise beset
with such danger--the hour so untimely, the alley so strictly
secluded--often, you said, haunted by that dragon, the English
teacher--une veritable begueule Britannique a ce que vous dites--
espece de monstre, brusque et rude comme un vieux caporal de
grenadiers, et reveche comme une religieuse" (the reader will excuse
my modesty in allowing this flattering sketch of my amiable self to
retain the slight veil of the original tongue). "You are aware," went
on this precious effusion, "that little Gustave, on account of his
illness, has been removed to a master's chamber--that favoured
chamber, whose lattice overlooks your prison-ground. There, I, the
best uncle in the world, am admitted to visit him. How tremblingly I
approached the window and glanced into your Eden--an Eden for me,
though a desert for you!--how I feared to behold vacancy, or the
dragon aforesaid! How my heart palpitated with delight when, through
apertures in the envious boughs, I at once caught the gleam of your
graceful straw-hat, and the waving of your grey dress--dress that I
should recognise amongst a thousand. But why, my angel, will you not
look up? Cruel, to deny me one ray of those adorable eyes!--how a
single glance would have revived me! I write this in fiery haste;
while the physician examines Gustave, I snatch an opportunity to
enclose it in a small casket, together with a bouquet of flowers,
the sweetest that blow--yet less sweet than thee, my Peri--my
all-charming! ever thine-thou well knowest whom!"
"I wish I did know whom," was my comment; and the wish bore even
closer reference to the person addressed in this choice document, than
to the writer thereof. Perhaps it was from the fiance of one of
the engaged pupils; and, in that case, there was no great harm done or
intended--only a small irregularity. Several of the girls, the
majority, indeed, had brothers or cousins at the neighbouring college.
But "la robe grise, le chapeau de paille," here surely was a clue--a
very confusing one. The straw-hat was an ordinary garden