repeated the word more distinctly.
Whenever she did this, Dr. Bretton smiled. Gradually, as they
conversed, the restraint on each side slackened: might the conference
have but been prolonged, I believe it would soon have become genial:
already to Paulina's lip and cheek returned the wreathing, dimpling
smile; she lisped once, and forgot to correct herself. And Dr. John, I
know not how _he_ changed, but change he did. He did not grow
gayer--no raillery, no levity sparkled across his aspect--but his
position seemed to become one of more pleasure to himself, and he
spoke his augmented comfort in readier language, in tones more suave.
Ten years ago this pair had always found abundance to say to each
other; the intervening decade had not narrowed the experience or
impoverished the intelligence of either: besides, there are certain
natures of which the mutual influence is such, that the more they say,
the more they have to say. For these out of association grows
adhesion, and out of adhesion, amalgamation.
Graham, however, must go: his was a profession whose claims are
neither to be ignored nor deferred. He left the room; but before he
could leave the house there was a return. I am sure he came back--not
for the paper, or card in his desk, which formed his ostensible
errand--but to assure himself, by one more glance, that Paulina's
aspect was really such as memory was bearing away: that he had not
been viewing her somehow by a partial, artificial light, and making a
fond mistake. No! he found the impression true--rather, indeed, he
gained than lost by this return: he took away with him a parting look
--shy, but very soft--as beautiful, as innocent, as any little fawn
could lift out of its cover of fern, or any lamb from its meadow-bed.
Being left alone, Paulina and I kept silence for some time: we both
took out some work, and plied a mute and diligent task. The white-wood
workbox of old days was now replaced by one inlaid with precious
mosaic, and furnished with implements of gold; the tiny and trembling
fingers that could scarce guide the needle, though tiny still, were
now swift and skilful: but there was the same busy knitting of the
brow, the same little dainty mannerisms, the same quick turns and
movements--now to replace a stray tress, and anon to shake from the
silken skirt some imaginary atom of dust--some clinging fibre of
thread.
That morning I was disposed for silence: the austere fury of the
winter-day had on me an awing, hushing influence. That passion of
January, so white and so bloodless, was not yet spent: the storm had
raved itself hoarse, but seemed no nearer exhaustion. Had Ginevra
Fanshawe been my companion in that drawing-room, she would not have
suffered me to muse and listen undisturbed. The presence just gone
from us would have been her theme; and how she would have rung the
changes on one topic! how she would have pursued and pestered me with
questions and surmises--worried and oppressed me with comments and
confidences I did not want, and longed to avoid.
Paulina Mary cast once or twice towards me a quiet but penetrating
glance of her dark, full eye; her lips half opened, as if to the
impulse of coming utterance: but she saw and delicately respected my
inclination for silence.
"This will not hold long," I thought to myself; for I was not
accustomed to find in women or girls any power of self-control, or
strength of self-denial. As far as I knew them, the chance of a gossip
about their usually trivial secrets, their often very washy and paltry
feelings, was a treat not to be readily foregone.
The little Countess promised an exception: she sewed till she was
tired of sewing, and then she took a book.
As chance would have it, she had sought it in Dr. Bretton's own
compartment of the bookcase; and it proved to be an old Bretton book--
some illustrated work of natural history. Often had I seen her
standing at Graham's side, resting that volume on his knee, and
reading to his tuition; and, when the lesson was over, begging, as a
treat, that he would tell her all about the pictures. I watched her
keenly: here was a true test of that memory she had boasted would her
recollections now be faithful?
Faithful? It could not be doubted. As she turned the leaves, over her
face passed gleam after gleam of expression, the least intelligent of
which was a full greeting to the Past. And then she turned to the
title-page, and looked at the name written in the schoolboy hand. She
looked at it long; nor was she satisfied with merely looking: she
gently passed over the characters the tips of her fingers,
accompanying the action with an unconscious but tender smile, which
converted the touch into a caress. Paulina loved the Past; but the
peculiarity of this little scene was, that she _said_ nothing:
she could feel without pouring out her feelings in a flux of words.
She now occupied herself at the bookcase for nearly an hour; taking
down volume after volume, and renewing her acquaintance with each.
This done, she seated herself on a low stool, rested her cheek on her
hand, and thought, and still was mute.
The sound of the front door opened below, a rush of cold wind, and her
father's voice speaking to Mrs. Bretton in the hall, startled her at
last. She sprang up: she was down-stairs in one second.
"Papa! papa! you are not going out?"
"My pet, I must go into town."
"But it is too--_too_ cold, papa."
And then I heard M. de Bassompierre showing to her how he was well
provided against the weather; and how he was going to have the
carriage, and to be quite snugly sheltered; and, in short, proving
that she need not fear for his comfort.
"But you will promise to come back here this evening, before it is
quite dark;--you and Dr. Bretton, both, in the carriage? It is not fit
to ride."
"Well, if I see the Doctor, I will tell him a lady has laid on him her
commands to take care of his precious health and come home early under
my escort."
"Yes, you must say a lady; and he will think it is his mother, and be
obedient And, papa, mind to come soon, for I _shall_ watch and
listen."
The door closed, and the carriage rolled softly through the snow; and
back returned the Countess,