swarming tapers,
nor swinging censers, nor ecclesiastical millinery, nor celestial
jewellery, touched my imagination a whit. What I saw struck me as
tawdry, not grand; as grossly material, not poetically spiritual.
This I did not tell Pere Silas; he was old, he looked venerable:
through every abortive experiment, under every repeated
disappointment, he remained personally kind to me, and I felt tender
of hurting his feelings. But on the evening of a certain day when,
from the balcony of a great house, I had been made to witness a huge
mingled procession of the church and the army--priests with relics,
and soldiers with weapons, an obese and aged archbishop, habited in
cambric and lace, looking strangely like a grey daw in bird-of-
paradise plumage, and a band of young girls fantastically robed and
garlanded--_then_ I spoke my mind to M. Paul.
"I did not like it," I told him; "I did not respect such ceremonies; I
wished to see no more."
And having relieved my conscience by this declaration, I was able to
go on, and, speaking more currently and clearly than my wont, to show
him that I had a mind to keep to my reformed creed; the more I saw of
Popery the closer I clung to Protestantism; doubtless there were
errors in every church, but I now perceived by contrast how severely
pure was my own, compared with her whose painted and meretricious face
had been unveiled for my admiration. I told him how we kept fewer
forms between us and God; retaining, indeed, no more than, perhaps,
the nature of mankind in the mass rendered necessary for due
observance. I told him I could not look on flowers and tinsel, on wax-
lights and embroidery, at such times and under such circumstances as
should be devoted to lifting the secret vision to Him whose home is
Infinity, and His being--Eternity. That when I thought of sin and
sorrow, of earthly corruption, mortal depravity, weighty temporal woe
--I could not care for chanting priests or mumming officials; that when
the pains of existence and the terrors of dissolution pressed before
me--when the mighty hope and measureless doubt of the future arose in
view--_then_, even the scientific strain, or the prayer in a
language learned and dead, harassed: with hindrance a heart which only
longed to cry--"God be merciful to me, a sinner!"
When I had so spoken, so declared my faith, and so widely severed
myself, from him I addressed--then, at last, came a tone accordant, an
echo responsive, one sweet chord of harmony in two conflicting
spirits.
"Whatever say priests or controversialists," murmured M. Emanuel, "God
is good, and loves all the sincere. Believe, then, what you can;
believe it as you can; one prayer, at least, we have in common; I also
cry--'O Dieu, sois appaise envers moi qui suis pecheur!'"
He leaned on the back of my chair. After some thought he again spoke:
"How seem in the eyes of that God who made all firmaments, from whose
nostrils issued whatever of life is here, or in the stars shining
yonder--how seem the differences of man? But as Time is not for God,
nor Space, so neither is Measure, nor Comparison. We abase ourselves
in our littleness, and we do right; yet it may be that the constancy
of one heart, the truth and faith of one mind according to the light
He has appointed, import as much to Him as the just motion of
satellites about their planets, of planets about their suns, of suns
around that mighty unseen centre incomprehensible, irrealizable, with
strange mental effort only divined.
"God guide us all! God bless you, Lucy!"
CHAPTER XXXVII.
SUNSHINE.
It was very, well for Paulina to decline further correspondence with
Graham till her father had sanctioned the intercourse. But Dr. Bretton
could not live within a league of the Hotel Crecy, and not contrive to
visit there often. Both lovers meant at first, I believe, to be
distant; they kept their intention so far as demonstrative courtship
went, but in feeling they soon drew very near.
All that was best in Graham sought Paulina; whatever in him was noble,
awoke, and grew in her presence. With his past admiration of Miss
Fanshawe, I suppose his intellect had little to do, but his whole
intellect, and his highest tastes, came in question now. These, like
all his faculties, were active, eager for nutriment, and alive to
gratification when it came.
I cannot say that Paulina designedly led him to talk of books, or
formally proposed to herself for a moment the task of winning him to
reflection, or planned the improvement of his mind, or so much as
fancied his mind could in any one respect be improved. She thought him
very perfect; it was Graham himself, who, at first by the merest
chance, mentioned some book he had been reading, and when in her
response sounded a welcome harmony of sympathies, something, pleasant
to his soul, he talked on, more and better perhaps than he had ever
talked before on such subjects. She listened with delight, and
answered with animation. In each successive answer, Graham heard a
music waxing finer and finer to his sense; in each he found a
suggestive, persuasive, magic accent that opened a, scarce-known
treasure-house within, showed him unsuspected power in his own mind,
and what was better, latent goodness in his heart. Each liked the way
in which the other talked; the voice, the diction, the expression
pleased; each keenly relished the flavour of the other's wit; they met
each other's meaning with strange quickness, their thoughts often
matched like carefully-chosen pearls. Graham had wealth of mirth by
nature; Paulina possessed no such inherent flow of animal spirits--
unstimulated, she inclined to be thoughtful and pensive--but now she
seemed merry as a lark; in her lover's genial presence, she glanced
like some soft glad light. How beautiful she grew in her happiness, I
can hardly express, but I wondered to see her. As to that gentle ice
of hers--that reserve on which she had depended; where was it now? Ah!
Graham would not long bear it; he brought with him a generous
influence that soon thawed the timid, self-imposed restriction.
Now were the old Bretton days talked over; perhaps brokenly at first,
with a sort of smiling diffidence, then with opening candour and still
growing confidence. Graham had made for himself a better opportunity
than that he had wished me to give; he had earned independence of the
collateral help that disobliging Lucy had refused; all his
reminiscences of