and if not, have left him again."
"And if again forced to return, and compelled to abide?"
"I don't know," she said, hastily. "Why do you ask me, monsieur?"
I would have an answer, because I saw a strange kind of spirit in her
eye, whose voice I determined to waken.
"Monsieur, if a wife's nature loathes that of the man she is wedded to,
marriage must be slavery. Against slavery all right thinkers revolt, and
though torture be the price of resistance, torture must be dared: though
the only road to freedom lie through the gates of death, those gates
must be passed; for freedom is indispensable. Then, monsieur, I would
resist as far as my strength permitted; when that strength failed I
should be sure of a refuge. Death would certainly screen me both from
bad laws and their consequences."
"Voluntary death, Frances?"
"No, monsieur. I'd have courage to live out every throe of anguish fate
assigned me, and principle to contend for justice and liberty to the
last."
"I see you would have made no patient Grizzle. And now, supposing fate
had merely assigned you the lot of an old maid, what then? How would you
have liked celibacy?"
"Not much, certainly. An old maid's life must doubtless be void and
vapid--her heart strained and empty. Had I been an old maid I should
have spent existence in efforts to fill the void and ease the aching. I
should have probably failed, and died weary and disappointed, despised
and of no account, like other single women. But I'm not an old maid,"
she added quickly. "I should have been, though, but for my master. I
should never have suited any man but Professor Crimsworth--no other
gentleman, French, English, or Belgian, would have thought me amiable or
handsome; and I doubt whether I should have cared for the approbation
of many others, if I could have obtained it. Now, I have been Professor
Crimsworth's wife eight years, and what is he in my eyes? Is he
honourable, beloved ----?" She stopped, her voice was cut off, her eyes
suddenly suffused. She and I were standing side by side; she threw her
arms round me, and strained me to her heart with passionate earnestness:
the energy of her whole being glowed in her dark and then dilated
eye, and crimsoned her animated cheek; her look and movement were like
inspiration; in one there was such a flash, in the other such a power.
Half an hour afterwards, when she had become calm, I asked where all
that wild vigour was gone which had transformed her ere-while and made
her glance so thrilling and ardent--her action so rapid and strong. She
looked down, smiling softly and passively:--
"I cannot tell where it is gone, monsieur," said she, "but I know that,
whenever it is wanted, it will come back again."
Behold us now at the close of the ten years, and we have realized an
independency. The rapidity with which we attained this end had its
origin in three reasons:-- Firstly, we worked so hard for it; secondly,
we had no incumbrances to delay success; thirdly, as soon as we had
capital to invest, two well-skilled counsellors, one in Belgium, one in
England, viz. Vandenhuten and Hunsden, gave us each a word of advice
as to the sort of investment to be chosen. The suggestion made was
judicious; and, being promptly acted on, the result proved gainful--I
need not say how gainful; I communicated details to Messrs. Vandenhuten
and Hunsden; nobody else can be interested in hearing them.
Accounts being wound up, and our professional connection disposed of, we
both agreed that, as mammon was not our master, nor his service that in
which we desired to spend our lives; as our desires were temperate, and
our habits unostentatious, we had now abundance to live on--abundance to
leave our boy; and should besides always have a balance on hand, which,
properly managed by right sympathy and unselfish activity, might
help philanthropy in her enterprises, and put solace into the hand of
charity.
To England we now resolved to take wing; we arrived there safely;
Frances realized the dream of her lifetime. We spent a whole summer
and autumn in travelling from end to end of the British islands, and
afterwards passed a winter in London. Then we thought it high time
to fix our residence. My heart yearned towards my native county of
----shire; and it is in ----shire I now live; it is in the library of my
own home I am now writing. That home lies amid a sequestered and rather
hilly region, thirty miles removed from X----; a region whose verdure
the smoke of mills has not yet sullied, whose waters still run pure,
whose swells of moorland preserve in some ferny glens that lie between
them the very primal wildness of nature, her moss, her bracken, her
blue-bells, her scents of reed and heather, her free and fresh breezes.
My house is a picturesque and not too spacious dwelling, with low and
long windows, a trellised and leaf-veiled porch over the front door,
just now, on this summer evening, looking like an arch of roses and ivy.
The garden is chiefly laid out in lawn, formed of the sod of the hills,
with herbage short and soft as moss, full of its own peculiar flowers,
tiny and starlike, imbedded in the minute embroidery of their fine
foliage. At the bottom of the sloping garden there is a wicket, which
opens upon a lane as green as the lawn, very long, shady, and little
frequented; on the turf of this lane generally appear the first daisies
of spring--whence its name--Daisy Lane; serving also as a distinction to
the house.
It terminates (the lane I mean) in a valley full of wood; which
wood--chiefly oak and beech--spreads shadowy about the vicinage of a
very old mansion, one of the Elizabethan structures, much larger, as
well as more antique than Daisy Lane, the property and residence of
an individual familiar both to me and to the reader. Yes, in Hunsden
Wood--for so are those glades and that grey building, with many gables
and more chimneys, named--abides Yorke Hunsden, still unmarried; never,
I suppose, having yet found his ideal, though I know at least a score
of young ladies within a circuit of forty miles, who would be willing to
assist him in the search.
The estate fell to him by the death of his father, five years since; he
has given up trade, after