she was soon obliged, like all
Miss Fanshawe's friends, to oppose resistance to encroachment. After a
while I heard no more of Mrs. Cholmondeley's presents; but still,
visiting went on, and the absolutely necessary dresses continued
to be supplied: also many little expensive _etcetera_--gloves,
bouquets, even trinkets. These things, contrary to her custom, and
even nature--for she was not secretive--were most sedulously kept out
of sight for a time; but one evening, when she was going to a large
party for which particular care and elegance of costume were demanded,
she could not resist coming to my chamber to show herself in all her
splendour.
Beautiful she looked: so young, so fresh, and with a delicacy of skin
and flexibility of shape altogether English, and not found in the list
of continental female charms. Her dress was new, costly, and perfect.
I saw at a glance that it lacked none of those finishing details which
cost so much, and give to the general effect such an air of tasteful
completeness.
I viewed her from top to toe. She turned airily round that I might
survey her on all sides. Conscious of her charms, she was in her best
humour: her rather small blue eyes sparkled gleefully. She was going
to bestow on me a kiss, in her school-girl fashion of showing her
delights but I said, "Steady! Let us be Steady, and know what we are
about, and find out the meaning of our magnificence"--and so put her
off at arm's length, to undergo cooler inspection.
"Shall I do?" was her question.
"Do?" said I. "There are different ways of doing; and, by my word, I
don't understand yours."
"But how do I look?"
"You look well dressed."
She thought the praise not warm enough, and proceeded to direct
attention to the various decorative points of her attire. "Look at
this _parure_," said she. "The brooch, the ear-rings, the
bracelets: no one in the school has such a set--not Madame herself"
"I see them all." (Pause.) "Did M. de Bassompierre give you those
jewels?"
"My uncle knows nothing about them."
"Were they presents from Mrs. Cholmondeley?"
"Not they, indeed. Mrs. Cholmondeley is a mean, stingy creature; she
never gives me anything now."
I did not choose to ask any further questions, but turned abruptly
away.
"Now, old Crusty--old Diogenes" (these were her familiar terms for me
when we disagreed), "what is the matter now?"
"Take yourself away. I have no pleasure in looking at you or your
_parure_."
For an instant, she seemed taken by surprise.
"What now, Mother Wisdom? I have not got into debt for it--that is,
not for the jewels, nor the gloves, nor the bouquet. My dress is
certainly not paid for, but uncle de Bassompierre will pay it in the
bill: he never notices items, but just looks at the total; and he is
so rich, one need not care about a few guineas more or less."
"Will you go? I want to shut the door.... Ginevra, people may tell you
you are very handsome in that ball-attire; but, in _my_ eyes, you
will never look so pretty as you did in the gingham gown and plain
straw bonnet you wore when I first saw you."
"Other people have not your puritanical tastes," was her angry reply.
"And, besides, I see no right you have to sermonize me."
"Certainly! I have little right; and you, perhaps, have still less to
come flourishing and fluttering into my chamber--a mere jay in
borrowed plumes. I have not the least respect for your feathers, Miss
Fanshawe; and especially the peacock's eyes you call a _parure_:
very pretty things, if you had bought them with money which was your
own, and which you could well spare, but not at all pretty under
present circumstances."
"On est la pour Mademoiselle Fanshawe!" was announced by the portress,
and away she tripped.
This semi-mystery of the _parure_ was not solved till two or
three days afterwards, when she came to make a voluntary confession.
"You need not be sulky with me," she began, "in the idea that I am
running somebody, papa or M. de Bassompierre, deeply into debt. I
assure you nothing remains unpaid for, but the few dresses I have
lately had: all the rest is settled."
"There," I thought, "lies the mystery; considering that they were not
given you by Mrs. Cholmondeley, and that your own means are limited to
a few shillings, of which I know you to be excessively careful."
"Ecoutez!" she went on, drawing near and speaking in her most
confidential and coaxing tone; for my "sulkiness" was inconvenient to
her: she liked me to be in a talking and listening mood, even if I
only talked to chide and listened to rail. "Ecoutez, chere grogneuse!
I will tell you all how and about it; and you will then see, not only
how right the whole thing is, but how cleverly managed. In the first
place, I _must_ go out. Papa himself said that he wished me to
see something of the world; he particularly remarked to Mrs.
Cholmondeley, that, though I was a sweet creature enough, I had rather
a bread-and-butter-eating, school-girl air; of which it was his
special desire that I should get rid, by an introduction to society
here, before I make my regular debut in England. Well, then, if I go
out, I _must_ dress. Mrs. Cholmondeley is turned shabby, and will
give nothing more; it would be too hard upon uncle to make him pay for
_all_ the things I need: _that_ you can't deny--_that_ agrees
with your own preachments. Well, but SOMEBODY who heard me
(quite by chance, I assure you) complaining to Mrs. Cholmondeley of my
distressed circumstances, and what straits I was put to for an
ornament or two--_somebody_, far from grudging one a present, was
quite delighted at the idea of being permitted to offer some trifle.
You should have seen what a _blanc-bec_ he looked when he first
spoke of it: how he hesitated and blushed, and positively trembled
from fear of a repulse."
"That will do, Miss Fanshawe. I suppose I am to understand that M.
Isidore is the benefactor: that it is from him you have accepted that
costly _parure_; that he supplies your bouquets and your gloves?"
"You express yourself so disagreeably," said she, "one hardly knows
how to answer; what I mean to say is, that I occasionally allow
Isidore the pleasure and honour of expressing his homage by the offer
of a trifle."
"It comes to the same thing.... Now, Ginevra, to speak the plain
truth, I