I see
her every Sunday. But you observed that under the name of 'Isidore'
she often spoke of me: may I--without inviting you to a breach of
confidence--inquire what was the tone, what the feeling of her
remarks? I feel somewhat anxious to know, being a little tormented
with uncertainty as to how I stand with her."
"Oh, she varies: she shifts and changes like the wind."
"Still, you can gather some general idea--?"
"I can," thought I, "but it would not do to communicate that general
idea to you. Besides, if I said she did not love you, I know you would
not believe me."
"You are silent," he pursued. "I suppose you have no good news to
impart. No matter. If she feels for me positive coldness and aversion,
it is a sign I do not deserve her."
"Do you doubt yourself? Do you consider yourself the inferior of
Colonel de Hamal?"
"I love Miss Fanshawe far more than de Hamal loves any human being,
and would care for and guard her better than he. Respecting de Hamal,
I fear she is under an illusion; the man's character is known to me,
all his antecedents, all his scrapes. He is not worthy of your
beautiful young friend."
"My 'beautiful young friend' ought to know that, and to know or feel
who is worthy of her," said I. "If her beauty or her brains will not
serve her so far, she merits the sharp lesson of experience."
"Are you not a little severe?"
"I am excessively severe--more severe than I choose to show you. You
should hear the strictures with which I favour my 'beautiful young
friend,' only that you would be unutterably shocked at my want of
tender considerateness for her delicate nature."
"She is so lovely, one cannot but be loving towards her. You--every
woman older than herself, must feel for such a simple, innocent,
girlish fairy a sort of motherly or elder-sisterly fondness. Graceful
angel! Does not your heart yearn towards her when she pours into your
ear her pure, childlike confidences? How you are privileged!" And he
sighed.
"I cut short these confidences somewhat abruptly now and then," said
I. "But excuse me, Dr. John, may I change the theme for one instant?
What a god-like person is that de Hamal! What a nose on his face--
perfect! Model one in putty or clay, you could not make a better or
straighter, or neater; and then, such classic lips and chin--and his
bearing--sublime."
"De Hamal is an unutterable puppy, besides being a very white-livered
hero."
"You, Dr. John, and every man of a less-refined mould than he, must
feel for him a sort of admiring affection, such as Mars and the
coarser deities may be supposed to have borne the young, graceful
Apollo."
"An unprincipled, gambling little jackanapes!" said Dr. John curtly,
"whom, with one hand, I could lift up by the waistband any day, and
lay low in the kennel if I liked."
"The sweet seraph!" said I. "What a cruel idea! Are you not a little
severe, Dr. John?"
And now I paused. For the second time that night I was going beyond
myself--venturing out of what I looked on as my natural habits--
speaking in an unpremeditated, impulsive strain, which startled me
strangely when I halted to reflect. On rising that morning, had I
anticipated that before night I should have acted the part of a gay
lover in a vaudeville; and an hour after, frankly discussed with Dr.
John the question of his hapless suit, and rallied him on his
illusions? I had no more presaged such feats than I had looked forward
to an ascent in a balloon, or a voyage to Cape Horn.
The Doctor and I, having paced down the walk, were now returning; the
reflex from the window again lit his face: he smiled, but his eye was
melancholy. How I wished that he could feel heart's-ease! How I
grieved that he brooded over pain, and pain from such a cause! He,
with his great advantages, _he_ to love in vain! I did not then
know that the pensiveness of reverse is the best phase for some minds;
nor did I reflect that some herbs, "though scentless when entire,
yield fragrance when they're bruised."
"Do not be sorrowful, do not grieve," I broke out. "If there is in
Ginevra one spark of worthiness of your affection, she will--she
_must_ feel devotion in return. Be cheerful, be hopeful, Dr.
John. Who should hope, if not you?"
In return for this speech I got--what, it must be supposed, I
deserved--a look of surprise: I thought also of some disapprobation.
We parted, and I went into the house very chill. The clocks struck and
the bells tolled midnight; people were leaving fast: the fete was
over; the lamps were fading. In another hour all the dwelling-house,
and all the pensionnat, were dark and hushed. I too was in bed, but
not asleep. To me it was not easy to sleep after a day of such
excitement.
CHAPTER XV.
THE LONG VACATION.
Following Madame Beck's fete, with its three preceding weeks of
relaxation, its brief twelve hours' burst of hilarity and dissipation,
and its one subsequent day of utter languor, came a period of
reaction; two months of real application, of close, hard study. These
two months, being the last of the "annee scolaire," were indeed the
only genuine working months in the year. To them was procrastinated--
into them concentrated, alike by professors, mistresses, and pupils--
the main burden of preparation for the examinations preceding the
distribution of prizes. Candidates for rewards had then to work in
good earnest; masters and teachers had to set their shoulders to the
wheel, to urge on the backward, and diligently aid and train the more
promising. A showy demonstration--a telling exhibition--must be got up
for public view, and all means were fair to this end.
I scarcely noted how the other teachers went to work; I had my own
business to mind; and _my_ task was not the least onerous, being
to imbue some ninety sets of brains with a due tincture of what they
considered a most complicated and difficult science, that of the
English language; and to drill ninety tongues in what, for them, was
an almost impossible pronunciation--the lisping and hissing dentals of
the Isles.
The examination-day arrived. Awful day! Prepared for with anxious
care, dressed for with silent despatch--nothing vaporous or fluttering
now--no white gauze or azure streamers; the grave, close, compact was
the order of the toilette. It seemed to me that I was