from
my hand, he divided the portion intended only for himself, and ordered
me to eat my share. I complied with no good grace, and vexed, I
suppose, by my reluctance, he opened a masked and dangerous battery.
All he had yet said, I could count as mere sound and fury, signifying
nothing: not so of the present attack.
It consisted in an unreasonable proposition with which he had before
afflicted me: namely, that on the next public examination-day I should
engage--foreigner as I was--to take my place on the first form of
first-class pupils, and with them improvise a composition in French,
on any subject any spectator might dictate, without benefit of grammar
or lexicon.
I knew what the result of such an experiment would be. I, to whom
nature had denied the impromptu faculty; who, in public, was by nature
a cypher; whose time of mental activity, even when alone, was not
under the meridian sun; who needed the fresh silence of morning, or
the recluse peace of evening, to win from the Creative Impulse one
evidence of his presence, one proof of his force; I, with whom that
Impulse was the most intractable, the most capricious, the most
maddening of masters (him before me always excepted)--a deity which
sometimes, under circumstances--apparently propitious, would not speak
when questioned, would not hear when appealed to, would not, when
sought, be found; but would stand, all cold, all indurated, all
granite, a dark Baal with carven lips and blank eye-balls, and breast
like the stone face of a tomb; and again, suddenly, at some turn, some
sound, some long-trembling sob of the wind, at some rushing past of an
unseen stream of electricity, the irrational demon would wake
unsolicited, would stir strangely alive, would rush from its pedestal
like a perturbed Dagon, calling to its votary for a sacrifice,
whatever the hour--to its victim for some blood, or some breath,
whatever the circumstance or scene--rousing its priest, treacherously
promising vaticination, perhaps filling its temple with a strange hum
of oracles, but sure to give half the significance to fateful winds,
and grudging to the desperate listener even a miserable remnant--
yielding it sordidly, as though each word had been a drop of the
deathless ichor of its own dark veins. And this tyrant I was to compel
into bondage, and make it improvise a theme, on a school estrade,
between a Mathilde and a Coralie, under the eye of a Madame Beck, for
the pleasure, and to the inspiration of a bourgeois of Labassecour!
Upon this argument M. Paul and I did battle more than once--strong
battle, with confused noise of demand and rejection, exaction and
repulse.
On this particular day I was soundly rated. "The obstinacy of my whole
sex," it seems, was concentrated in me; I had an "orgueil de diable."
I feared to fail, forsooth! What did it matter whether I failed or
not? Who was I that I should not fail, like my betters? It would do me
good to fail. He wanted to see me worsted (I knew he did), and one
minute he paused to take breath.
"Would I speak now, and be tractable?"
"Never would I be tractable in this matter. Law itself should not
compel me. I would pay a fine, or undergo an imprisonment, rather than
write for a show and to order, perched up on a platform."
"Could softer motives influence me? Would I yield for friendship's
sake?"
"Not a whit, not a hair-breadth. No form of friendship under the sun
had a right to exact such a concession. No true friendship would
harass me thus."
He supposed then (with a sneer--M. Paul could sneer supremely, curling
his lip, opening his nostrils, contracting his eyelids)--he supposed
there was but one form of appeal to which I would listen, and of that
form it was not for him to make use.
"Under certain persuasions, from certain quarters, je vous vois
d'ici," said he, "eagerly subscribing to the sacrifice, passionately
arming for the effort."
"Making a simpleton, a warning, and an example of myself, before a
hundred and fifty of the 'papas' and 'mammas' of Villette."
And here, losing patience, I broke out afresh with a cry that I wanted
to be liberated--to get out into the air--I was almost in a fever.
"Chut!" said the inexorable, "this was a mere pretext to run away;
_he_ was not hot, with the stove close at his back; how could I
suffer, thoroughly screened by his person?"
"I did not understand his constitution. I knew nothing of the natural
history of salamanders. For my own part, I was a phlegmatic islander,
and sitting in an oven did not agree with me; at least, might I step
to the well, and get a glass of water--the sweet apples had made me
thirsty?"
"If that was all, he would do my errand."
He went to fetch the water. Of course, with a door only on the latch
behind me, I lost not my opportunity. Ere his return, his half-worried
prey had escaped.
CHAPTER XXXI.
THE DRYAD.
The spring was advancing, and the weather had turned suddenly warm.
This change of temperature brought with it for me, as probably for
many others, temporary decrease of strength. Slight exertion at this
time left me overcome with fatigue--sleepless nights entailed languid
days.
One Sunday afternoon, having walked the distance of half a league to
the Protestant church, I came back weary and exhausted; and taking
refuge in my solitary sanctuary, the first classe, I was glad to sit
down, and to make of my desk a pillow for my arms and head.
Awhile I listened to the lullaby of bees humming in the berceau, and
watched, through the glass door and the tender, lightly-strewn spring
foliage, Madame Beck and a gay party of friends, whom she had
entertained that day at dinner after morning mass, walking in the
centre-alley under orchard boughs dressed at this season in blossom,
and wearing a colouring as pure and warm as mountain-snow at sun-rise.
My principal attraction towards this group of guests lay, I remember,
in one figure--that of a handsome young girl whom I had seen before as
a visitor at Madame Beck's, and of whom I had been vaguely told that
she was a "filleule," or god-daughter, of M. Emanuel's, and that
between her mother, or aunt, or some other female relation of hers,
and the Professor, had existed of old a special friendship. M. Paul
was not of the holiday band to-day, but I had seen this young girl
with him ere now, and