of
his life, blighting his hope, and awarding him, for love and domestic
happiness, long mourning and cheerless solitude, he treated with the
respect a good son might offer a kind mother. He had brought her to
this house, "and," continued the priest, while genuine tears rose to
his eyes, "here, too, he shelters me, his old tutor, and Agnes, a
superannuated servant of his father's family. To our sustenance, and
to other charities, I know he devotes three-parts of his income,
keeping only the fourth to provide himself with bread and the most
modest accommodations. By this arrangement he has rendered it
impossible to himself ever to marry: he has given himself to God and
to his angel-bride as much as if he were a priest, like me."
The father had wiped away his tears before he uttered these last
words, and in pronouncing them, he for one instant raised his eyes to
mine. I caught this glance, despite its veiled character; the
momentary gleam shot a meaning which struck me.
These Romanists are strange beings. Such a one among them--whom you
know no more than the last Inca of Peru, or the first Emperor of
China--knows you and all your concerns; and has his reasons for saying
to you so and so, when you simply thought the communication sprang
impromptu from the instant's impulse: his plan in bringing it about
that you shall come on such a day, to such a place, under such and
such circumstances, when the whole arrangement seems to your crude
apprehension the ordinance of chance, or the sequel of exigency.
Madame Beck's suddenly-recollected message and present, my artless
embassy to the Place of the Magi, the old priest accidentally
descending the steps and crossing the square, his interposition on my
behalf with the bonne who would have sent me away, his reappearance on
the staircase, my introduction to this room, the portrait, the
narrative so affably volunteered--all these little incidents, taken as
they fell out, seemed each independent of its successor; a handful of
loose beads: but threaded through by that quick-shot and crafty glance
of a Jesuit-eye, they dropped pendent in a long string, like that
rosary on the prie-dieu. Where lay the link of junction, where the
little clasp of this monastic necklace? I saw or felt union, but could
not yet find the spot, or detect the means of connection.
Perhaps the musing-fit into which I had by this time fallen, appeared
somewhat suspicious in its abstraction; he gently interrupted:
"Mademoiselle," said he, "I trust you have not far to go through these
inundated streets?"
"More than half a league."
"You live----?"
"In the Rue Fossette."
"Not" (with animation), "not at the pensionnat of Madame Beck?"
"The same."
"Donc" (clapping his hands), "donc, vous devez connaitre mon noble
eleve, mon Paul?"
"Monsieur Paul Emanuel, Professor of Literature?"
"He and none other."
A brief silence fell. The spring of junction seemed suddenly to have
become palpable; I felt it yield to pressure.
"Was it of M. Paul you have been speaking?" I presently inquired. "Was
he your pupil and the benefactor of Madame Walravens?"
"Yes, and of Agnes, the old servant: and moreover, (with a certain
emphasis), he was and _is_ the lover, true, constant and eternal,
of that saint in heaven--Justine Marie."
"And who, father, are _you?_" I continued; and though I
accentuated the question, its utterance was well nigh superfluous; I
was ere this quite prepared for the answer which actually came.
"I, daughter, am Pere Silas; that unworthy son of Holy Church whom you
once honoured with a noble and touching confidence, showing me the
core of a heart, and the inner shrine of a mind whereof, in solemn
truth, I coveted the direction, in behalf of the only true faith. Nor
have I for a day lost sight of you, nor for an hour failed to take in
you a rooted interest. Passed under the discipline of Rome, moulded by
her high training, inoculated with her salutary doctrines, inspired by
the zeal she alone gives--I realize what then might be your spiritual
rank, your practical value; and I envy Heresy her prey."
This struck me as a special state of things--I half-realized myself in
that condition also; passed under discipline, moulded, trained,
inoculated, and so on. "Not so," thought I, but I restrained
deprecation, and sat quietly enough.
"I suppose M. Paul does not live here?" I resumed, pursuing a theme
which I thought more to the purpose than any wild renegade dreams.
"No; he only comes occasionally to worship his beloved saint, to make
his confession to me, and to pay his respects to her he calls his
mother. His own lodging consists but of two rooms: he has no servant,
and yet he will not suffer Madame Walravens to dispose of those
splendid jewels with which you see her adorned, and in which she takes
a puerile pride as the ornaments of her youth, and the last relics of
her son the jeweller's wealth."
"How often," murmured I to myself, "has this man, this M. Emanuel,
seemed to me to lack magnanimity in trifles, yet how great he is in
great things!"
I own I did not reckon amongst the proofs of his greatness, either the
act of confession, or the saint-worship.
"How long is it since that lady died?" I inquired, looking at Justine
Marie.
"Twenty years. She was somewhat older than M. Emanuel; he was then
very young, for he is not much beyond forty."
"Does he yet weep her?"
"His heart will weep her always: the essence of Emanuel's nature is--
constancy."
This was said with marked emphasis.
And now the sun broke out pallid and waterish; the rain yet fell, but
there was no more tempest: that hot firmament had cloven and poured
out its lightnings. A longer delay would scarce leave daylight for my
return, so I rose, thanked the father for his hospitality and his
tale, was benignantly answered by a "pax vobiscum," which I made
kindly welcome, because it seemed uttered with a true benevolence; but
I liked less the mystic phrase accompanying it.
"Daughter, you _shall_ be what you _shall_ be!" an oracle
that made me shrug my shoulders as soon as I had got outside the door.
Few of us know what we are to come to certainly, but for all that had
happened yet, I had good hopes of living and dying a sober-minded
Protestant: there was a hollowness within, and a flourish around "Holy
Church" which tempted me but moderately. I went on my way pondering
many things. Whatever Romanism may