that grand morning's dew--
bathe in its sunrise.
In the course of the walk I was told how Justine Marie Sauveur had
always been regarded with the affection proper to a daughter--how,
with M. Paul's consent, she had been affianced for months to one
Heinrich Muehler, a wealthy young German merchant, and was to be
married in the course of a year. Some of M. Emanuel's relations and
connections would, indeed, it seems, have liked him to marry her, with
a view to securing her fortune in the family; but to himself the
scheme was repugnant, and the idea totally inadmissible.
We reached Madame Beck's door. Jean Baptiste's clock tolled nine. At
this hour, in this house, eighteen months since, had this man at my
side bent before me, looked into my face and eyes, and arbitered my
destiny. This very evening he had again stooped, gazed, and decreed.
How different the look--how far otherwise the fate!
He deemed me born under his star: he seemed to have spread over me its
beam like a banner. Once--unknown, and unloved, I held him harsh and
strange; the low stature, the wiry make, the angles, the darkness, the
manner, displeased me. Now, penetrated with his influence, and living
by his affection, having his worth by intellect, and his goodness by
heart--I preferred him before all humanity.
We parted: he gave me his pledge, and then his farewell. We parted:
the next day--he sailed.
CHAPTER XLII.
FINIS.
Man cannot prophesy. Love is no oracle. Fear sometimes imagines a
vain thing. Those years of absence! How had I sickened over their
anticipation! The woe they must bring seemed certain as death. I knew
the nature of their course: I never had doubt how it would harrow as
it went. The juggernaut on his car towered there a grim load. Seeing
him draw nigh, burying his broad wheels in the oppressed soil--I, the
prostrate votary--felt beforehand the annihilating craunch.
Strange to say--strange, yet true, and owning many parallels in life's
experience--that anticipatory craunch proved all--yes--nearly
_all_ the torture. The great Juggernaut, in his great chariot,
drew on lofty, loud, and sullen. He passed quietly, like a shadow
sweeping the sky, at noon. Nothing but a chilling dimness was seen or
felt. I looked up. Chariot and demon charioteer were gone by; the
votary still lived.
M. Emanuel was away three years. Reader, they were the three happiest
years of my life. Do you scout the paradox? Listen. I commenced my
school; I worked--I worked hard. I deemed myself the steward of his
property, and determined, God willing, to render a good account.
Pupils came--burghers at first--a higher class ere long. About the
middle of the second year an unexpected chance threw into my hands an
additional hundred pounds: one day I received from England a letter
containing that sum. It came from Mr. Marchmont, the cousin and heir
of my dear and dead mistress. He was just recovering from a dangerous
illness; the money was a peace-offering to his conscience, reproaching
him in the matter of, I know not what, papers or memoranda found after
his kinswoman's death--naming or recommending Lucy Snowe. Mrs. Barrett
had given him my address. How far his conscience had been sinned
against, I never inquired. I asked no questions, but took the cash and
made it useful.
With this hundred pounds I ventured to take the house adjoining mine.
I would not leave that which M. Paul had chosen, in which he had left,
and where he expected again to find me. My externat became a
pensionnat; that also prospered.
The secret of my success did not lie so much in myself, in any
endowment, any power of mine, as in a new state of circumstances, a
wonderfully changed life, a relieved heart. The spring which moved my
energies lay far away beyond seas, in an Indian isle. At parting, I
had been left a legacy; such a thought for the present, such a hope
for the future, such a motive for a persevering, a laborious, an
enterprising, a patient and a brave course--I _could_ not flag.
Few things shook me now; few things had importance to vex, intimidate,
or depress me: most things pleased--mere trifles had a charm.
Do not think that this genial flame sustained itself, or lived wholly
on a bequeathed hope or a parting promise. A generous provider
supplied bounteous fuel. I was spared all chill, all stint; I was not
suffered to fear penury; I was not tried with suspense. By every
vessel he wrote; he wrote as he gave and as he loved, in full-handed,
full-hearted plenitude. He wrote because he liked to write; he did not
abridge, because he cared not to abridge. He sat down, he took pen and
paper, because he loved Lucy and had much to say to her; because he
was faithful and thoughtful, because he was tender and true. There was
no sham and no cheat, and no hollow unreal in him. Apology never
dropped her slippery oil on his lips--never proffered, by his pen, her
coward feints and paltry nullities: he would give neither a stone, nor
an excuse--neither a scorpion; nor a disappointment; his letters were
real food that nourished, living water that refreshed.
And was I grateful? God knows! I believe that scarce a living being so
remembered, so sustained, dealt with in kind so constant, honourable
and noble, could be otherwise than grateful to the death.
Adherent to his own religion (in him was not the stuff of which is
made the facile apostate), he freely left me my pure faith. He did not
tease nor tempt. He said:--
"Remain a Protestant. My little English Puritan, I love Protestantism
in you. I own its severe charm. There is something in its ritual I
cannot receive myself, but it is the sole creed for 'Lucy.'"
All Rome could not put into him bigotry, nor the Propaganda itself
make him a real Jesuit. He was born honest, and not false--artless,
and not cunning--a freeman, and not a slave. His tenderness had
rendered him ductile in a priest's hands, his affection, his
devotedness, his sincere pious enthusiasm blinded his kind eyes
sometimes, made him abandon justice to himself to do the work of
craft, and serve the ends of selfishness; but these are faults so rare
to find, so costly to their owner to indulge, we scarce know whether
they will not one day be reckoned amongst the jewels.
* * * * *
And now the three years are past: M. Emanuel's return is fixed. It