in this, that they think themselves
the sole faithful of God's creatures. On a very fervent and living
truth to myself, I, too, till lately scarce dared count, from any
quarter; but----look at me.",
I lifted my happy eyes: they _were_ happy now, or they would have
been no interpreters of my heart.
"Well," said he, after some seconds' scrutiny, "there is no denying
that signature: Constancy wrote it: her pen is of iron. Was the record
painful?"
"Severely painful," I said, with truth. "Withdraw her hand, Monsieur;
I can bear its inscribing force no more."
"Elle est toute pale," said he, speaking to himself; "cette figure-la
me fait mal."
"Ah! I am not pleasant to look at----?"
I could not help saying this; the words came unbidden: I never
remember the time when I had not a haunting dread of what might be the
degree of my outward deficiency; this dread pressed me at the moment
with special force.
A great softness passed upon his countenance; his violet eyes grew
suffused and glistening under their deep Spanish lashes: he started
up; "Let us walk on."
"Do I displease your eyes _much_?" I took courage to urge: the
point had its vital import for me.
He stopped, and gave me a short, strong answer; an answer which
silenced, subdued, yet profoundly satisfied. Ever after that I knew
what I was for _him_; and what I might be for the rest of the
world, I ceased painfully to care. Was it weak to lay so much stress
on an opinion about appearance? I fear it might be; I fear it was; but
in that case I must avow no light share of weakness. I must own great
fear of displeasing--a strong wish moderately to please M. Paul.
Whither we rambled, I scarce knew. Our walk was long, yet seemed
short; the path was pleasant, the day lovely. M. Emanuel talked of his
voyage--he thought of staying away three years. On his return from
Guadaloupe, he looked forward to release from liabilities and a clear
course; and what did I purpose doing in the interval of his absence?
he asked. I had talked once, he reminded me, of trying to be
independent and keeping a little school of my own: had I dropped the
idea?
"Indeed, I had not: I was doing my best to save what would enable me
to put it in practice."
"He did not like leaving me in the Rue Fossette; he feared I should
miss him there too much--I should feel desolate--I should grow sad--?"
This was certain; but I promised to do my best to endure.
"Still," said he, speaking low, "there is another objection to your
present residence. I should wish to write to you sometimes: it would
not be well to have any uncertainty about the safe transmission of
letters; and in the Rue Fossette--in short, our Catholic discipline in
certain matters--though justifiable and expedient--might possibly,
under peculiar circumstances, become liable to misapplication--perhaps
abuse."
"But if you write," said I, "I _must_ have your letters; and I
_will_ have them: ten directors, twenty directresses, shall not
keep them from me. I am a Protestant: I will not bear that kind of
discipline: Monsieur, I _will not_."
"Doucement--doucement," rejoined he; "we will contrive a plan; we have
our resources: soyez tranquille."
So speaking, he paused.
We were now returning from the long walk. We had reached the middle of
a clean Faubourg, where the houses were small, but looked pleasant. It
was before the white door-step of a very neat abode that M. Paul had
halted.
"I call here," said he.
He did not knock, but taking from his pocket a key, he opened and
entered at once. Ushering me in, he shut the door behind us. No
servant appeared. The vestibule was small, like the house, but freshly
and tastefully painted; its vista closed in a French window with vines
trained about the panes, tendrils, and green leaves kissing the glass.
Silence reigned in this dwelling.
Opening an inner door, M. Paul disclosed a parlour, or salon--very
tiny, but I thought, very pretty. Its delicate walls were tinged like
a blush; its floor was waxed; a square of brilliant carpet covered its
centre; its small round table shone like the mirror over its hearth;
there was a little couch, a little chiffonniere, the half-open,
crimson-silk door of which, showed porcelain on the shelves; there was
a French clock, a lamp; there were ornaments in biscuit china; the
recess of the single ample window was filled with a green stand,
bearing three green flower-pots, each filled with a fine plant glowing
in bloom; in one corner appeared a gueridon with a marble top, and
upon it a work-box, and a glass filled with violets in water. The
lattice of this room was open; the outer air breathing through, gave
freshness, the sweet violets lent fragrance.
"Pretty, pretty place!" said I. M. Paul smiled to see me so pleased.
"Must we sit down here and wait?" I asked in a whisper, half awed by
the deep pervading hush.
"We will first peep into one or two other nooks of this nutshell," he
replied.
"Dare you take the freedom of going all over the house?" I inquired.
"Yes, I dare," said he, quietly.
He led the way. I was shown a little kitchen with a little stove and
oven, with few but bright brasses, two chairs and a table. A small
cupboard held a diminutive but commodious set of earthenware.
"There is a coffee service of china in the salon," said M. Paul, as I
looked at the six green and white dinner-plates; the four dishes, the
cups and jugs to match.
Conducted up the narrow but clean staircase, I was permitted a glimpse
of two pretty cabinets of sleeping-rooms; finally, I was once more led
below, and we halted with a certain ceremony before a larger door than
had yet been opened.
Producing a second key, M. Emanuel adjusted it to the lock of this
door. He opened, put me in before him.
"Voici!" he cried.
I found myself in a good-sized apartment, scrupulously clean, though
bare, compared with those I had hitherto seen. The well-scoured boards
were carpetless; it contained two rows of green benches and desks,
with an alley down the centre, terminating in an estrade, a teacher's
chair and table; behind them a tableau, On the walls hung two maps; in
the windows flowered a few hardy plants; in short, here was a
miniature classe--complete, neat, pleasant.
"It is a school then?" said I. "Who keeps it? I never heard of