XI.
I HAD indeed had a very long talk with the crafty little politician, and
on regaining my quarters, I found that dinner was half over. To be late
at meals was against a standing rule of the establishment, and had it
been one of the Flemish ushers who thus entered after the removal of the
soup and the commencement of the first course, M. Pelet would probably
have greeted him with a public rebuke, and would certainly have mulcted
him both of soup and fish; as it was, that polite though partial
gentleman only shook his head, and as I took my place, unrolled my
napkin, and said my heretical grace to myself, he civilly despatched a
servant to the kitchen, to bring me a plate of "puree aux carottes"
(for this was a maigre-day), and before sending away the first course,
reserved for me a portion of the stock-fish of which it consisted.
Dinner being over, the boys rushed out for their evening play; Kint and
Vandam (the two ushers) of course followed them. Poor fellows! if they
had not looked so very heavy, so very soulless, so very indifferent to
all things in heaven above or in the earth beneath, I could have pitied
them greatly for the obligation they were under to trail after those
rough lads everywhere and at all times; even as it was, I felt disposed
to scout myself as a privileged prig when I turned to ascend to my
chamber, sure to find there, if not enjoyment, at least liberty; but
this evening (as had often happened before) I was to be still farther
distinguished.
"Eh bien, mauvais sujet!" said the voice of M. Pelet behind me, as I
set my foot on the first step of the stair, "ou allez-vous? Venez a la
salle-a-manger, que je vous gronde un peu."
"I beg pardon, monsieur," said I, as I followed him to his private
sitting-room, "for having returned so late--it was not my fault."
"That is just what I want to know," rejoined M. Pelet, as he ushered me
into the comfortable parlour with a good wood-fire--for the stove had
now been removed for the season. Having rung the bell he ordered "Coffee
for two," and presently he and I were seated, almost in English comfort,
one on each side of the hearth, a little round table between us, with
a coffee-pot, a sugar-basin, and two large white china cups. While
M. Pelet employed himself in choosing a cigar from a box, my thoughts
reverted to the two outcast ushers, whose voices I could hear even now
crying hoarsely for order in the playground.
"C'est une grande responsabilite, que la surveillance," observed I.
"Plait-il?" dit M. Pelet.
I remarked that I thought Messieurs Vandam and Kint must sometimes be a
little fatigued with their labours.
"Des betes de somme,--des betes de somme," murmured scornfully the
director. Meantime I offered him his cup of coffee.
"Servez-vous mon garcon," said he blandly, when I had put a couple of
huge lumps of continental sugar into his cup. "And now tell me why you
stayed so long at Mdlle. Reuter's. I know that lessons conclude, in her
establishment as in mine, at four o'clock, and when you returned it was
past five."
"Mdlle. wished to speak with me, monsieur."
"Indeed! on what subject? if one may ask."
"Mademoiselle talked about nothing, monsieur."
"A fertile topic! and did she discourse thereon in the schoolroom,
before the pupils?"
"No; like you, monsieur, she asked me to walk into her parlour."
"And Madame Reuter--the old duenna--my mother's gossip, was there, of
course?"
"No, monsieur; I had the honour of being quite alone with mademoiselle."
"C'est joli--cela," observed M. Pelet, and he smiled and looked into the
fire.
"Honi soit qui mal y pense," murmured I, significantly.
"Je connais un peu ma petite voisine--voyez-vous."
"In that case, monsieur will be able to aid me in finding out what was
mademoiselle's reason for making me sit before her sofa one mortal hour,
listening to the most copious and fluent dissertation on the merest
frivolities."
"She was sounding your character."
"I thought so, monsieur."
"Did she find out your weak point?"
"What is my weak point?"
"Why, the sentimental. Any woman sinking her shaft deep enough, will
at last reach a fathomless spring of sensibility in thy breast,
Crimsworth."
I felt the blood stir about my heart and rise warm to my cheek.
"Some women might, monsieur."
"Is Mdlle. Reuter of the number? Come, speak frankly, mon fils; elle est
encore jeune, plus agee que toi peut-etre, mais juste asset pour unir
la tendresse d'une petite maman a l'amour d'une epouse devouee; n'est-ce
pas que cela t'irait superieurement?"
"No, monsieur; I should like my wife to be my wife, and not half my
mother."
"She is then a little too old for you?"
"No, monsieur, not a day too old if she suited me in other things."
"In what does she not suit you, William? She is personally agreeable, is
she not?"
"Very; her hair and complexion are just what I admire; and her turn of
form, though quite Belgian, is full of grace."
"Bravo! and her face? her features? How do you like them?"
"A little harsh, especially her mouth."
"Ah, yes! her mouth," said M. Pelet, and he chuckled inwardly. "There is
character about her mouth--firmness--but she has a very pleasant smile;
don't you think so?"
"Rather crafty."
"True, but that expression of craft is owing to her eyebrows; have you
remarked her eyebrows?"
I answered that I had not.
"You have not seen her looking down then?" said he.
"No."
"It is a treat, notwithstanding. Observe her when she has some knitting,
or some other woman's work in hand, and sits the image of peace, calmly
intent on her needles and her silk, some discussion meantime going on
around her, in the course of which peculiarities of character are being
developed, or important interests canvassed; she takes no part in it;
her humble, feminine mind is wholly with her knitting; none of her
features move; she neither presumes to smile approval, nor frown
disapprobation; her little hands assiduously ply their unpretending
task; if she can only get this purse finished, or this bonnet-grec
completed, it is enough for her. If gentlemen approach her chair, a
deeper quiescence, a meeker modesty settles on her features, and clothes
her general mien; observe then her eyebrows, et dites-moi s'il n'y a pas
du chat dans l'un et du renard dans l'autre."
"I will take careful notice the first opportunity," said I.
"And then," continued M. Pelet, "the eyelid will flicker, the
light-coloured lashes