"little Polly" found their proper expression in his
own pleasant tones, by his own kind and handsome lips; how much better
than if suggested by me.
More than once when we were alone, Paulina would tell me how wonderful
and curious it was to discover the richness and accuracy of his memory
in this matter. How, while he was looking at her, recollections would
seem to be suddenly quickened in his mind. He reminded her that she
had once gathered his head in her arms, caressed his leonine graces,
and cried out, "Graham, I _do_ like you!" He told her how she
would set a footstool beside him, and climb by its aid to his knee. At
this day he said he could recall the sensation of her little hands
smoothing his cheek, or burying themselves in his thick mane. He
remembered the touch of her small forefinger, placed half tremblingly,
half curiously, in the cleft in his chin, the lisp, the look with
which she would name it "a pretty dimple," then seek his eyes and
question why they pierced so, telling him he had a "nice, strange
face; far nicer, far stranger, than either his mamma or Lucy Snowe."
"Child as I was," remarked Paulina, "I wonder how I dared be so
venturous. To me he seems now all sacred, his locks are inaccessible,
and, Lucy, I feel a sort of fear, when I look at his firm, marble
chin, at his straight Greek features. Women are called beautiful,
Lucy; he is not like a woman, therefore I suppose he is not beautiful,
but what is he, then? Do other people see him with my eyes? Do
_you_ admire him?"
"I'll tell you what I do, Paulina," was once my answer to her many
questions. "_I never see him_. I looked at him twice or thrice
about a year ago, before he recognised me, and then I shut my eyes;
and if he were to cross their balls twelve times between each day's
sunset and sunrise, except from memory, I should hardly know what
shape had gone by."
"Lucy, what do you mean?" said she, under her breath.
"I mean that I value vision, and dread being struck stone blind."
It was best to answer her strongly at once, and to silence for ever
the tender, passionate confidences which left her lips sweet honey,
and sometimes dropped in my ear--molten lead. To me, she commented no
more on her lover's beauty.
Yet speak of him she would; sometimes shyly, in quiet, brief phrases;
sometimes with a tenderness of cadence, and music of voice exquisite
in itself; but which chafed me at times miserably; and then, I know, I
gave her stern looks and words; but cloudless happiness had dazzled
her native clear sight, and she only thought Lucy--fitful.
"Spartan girl! Proud Lucy!" she would say, smiling at me. "Graham says
you are the most peculiar, capricious little woman he knows; but yet
you are excellent; we both think so."
"You both think you know not what," said I. "Have the goodness to make
me as little the subject of your mutual talk and thoughts as possible.
I have my sort of life apart from yours."
"But ours, Lucy, is a beautiful life, or it will be; and you shall
share it."
"I shall share no man's or woman's life in this world, as you
understand sharing. I think I have one friend of my own, but am not
sure; and till I _am_ sure, I live solitary."
"But solitude is sadness."
"Yes; it is sadness. Life, however; has worse than that. Deeper than
melancholy, lies heart-break."
"Lucy, I wonder if anybody will ever comprehend you altogether."
There is, in lovers, a certain infatuation of egotism; they will have
a witness of their happiness, cost that witness what it may. Paulina
had forbidden letters, yet Dr. Bretton wrote; she had resolved against
correspondence, yet she answered, were it only to chide. She showed me
these letters; with something of the spoiled child's wilfulness, and
of the heiress's imperiousness, she _made_ me read them. As I
read Graham's, I scarce wondered at her exaction, and understood her
pride: they were fine letters--manly and fond--modest and gallant.
Hers must have appeared to him beautiful. They had not been written to
show her talents; still less, I think, to express her love. On the
contrary, it appeared that she had proposed to herself the task of
hiding that feeling, and bridling her lover's ardour. But how could
such letters serve such a purpose? Graham was become dear as her life;
he drew her like a powerful magnet. For her there was influence
unspeakable in all he uttered, wrote, thought, or looked. With this
unconfessed confession, her letters glowed; it kindled them, from
greeting to adieu.
"I wish papa knew; I _do_ wish papa knew!" began now to be her
anxious murmur. "I wish, and yet I fear. I can hardly keep Graham back
from telling him. There is nothing I long for more than to have this
affair settled--to speak out candidly; and yet I dread the crisis. I
know, I am certain, papa will be angry at the first; I fear he will
dislike me almost; it will seem to him an untoward business; it will
be a surprise, a shock: I can hardly foresee its whole effect on him."
The fact was--her father, long calm, was beginning to be a little
stirred: long blind on one point, an importunate light was beginning
to trespass on his eye.
To _her_, he said nothing; but when she was not looking at, or
perhaps thinking of him, I saw him gaze and meditate on her.
One evening--Paulina was in her dressing-room, writing, I believe, to
Graham; she had left me in the library, reading--M. de Bassompierre
came in; he sat down: I was about to withdraw; he requested me to
remain--gently, yet in a manner which showed he wished compliance. He
had taken his seat near the window, at a distance from me; he opened a
desk; he took from it what looked like a memorandum-book; of this book
he studied a certain entry for several minutes.
"Miss Snowe," said he, laying it down, "do you know my little girl's
age?"
"About eighteen, is it not, sir?"
"It seems so. This old pocket-book tells me she was born on the 5th of
May, in the year 18--, eighteen years ago. It is strange; I had lost
the just reckoning of her age. I thought of her as twelve--fourteen--
an indefinite date;