all the director wished to be effected; but I
could talk in my own way--the way M. Paul was used to--and of which he
could follow the meanderings and fill the hiatus, and pardon the
strange stammerings, strange to him no longer. At ease with him, I
could defend my creed and faith in my own fashion; in some degree I
could lull his prejudices. He was not satisfied when he went away,
hardly was he appeased; but he was made thoroughly to feel that
Protestants were not necessarily the irreverent Pagans his director
had insinuated; he was made to comprehend something of their mode of
honouring the Light, the Life, the Word; he was enabled partly to
perceive that, while their veneration for things venerable was not
quite like that cultivated in his Church, it had its own, perhaps,
deeper power--its own more solemn awe.
I found that Pere Silas (himself, I must repeat, not a bad man, though
the advocate of a bad cause) had darkly stigmatized Protestants in
general, and myself by inference, with strange names, had ascribed to
us strange "isms;" Monsieur Emanuel revealed all this in his frank
fashion, which knew not secretiveness, looking at me as he spoke with
a kind, earnest fear, almost trembling lest there should be truth in
the charges. Pere Silas, it seems, had closely watched me, had
ascertained that I went by turns, and indiscriminately, to the three
Protestant Chapels of Villette--the French, German, and English--_id
est_, the Presbyterian, Lutheran, Episcopalian. Such liberality
argued in the father's eyes profound indifference--who tolerates all,
he reasoned, can be attached to none. Now, it happened that I had
often secretly wondered at the minute and unimportant character of the
differences between these three sects--at the unity and identity of
their vital doctrines: I saw nothing to hinder them from being one day
fused into one grand Holy Alliance, and I respected them all, though I
thought that in each there were faults of form, incumbrances, and
trivialities. Just what I thought, that did I tell M. Emanuel, and
explained to him that my own last appeal, the guide to which I looked,
and the teacher which I owned, must always be the Bible itself, rather
than any sect, of whatever name or nation.
He left me soothed, yet full of solicitude, breathing a wish, as
strong as a prayer, that if I were wrong, Heaven would lead me right.
I heard, poured forth on the threshold, some fervid murmurings to
"Marie, Reine du Ciel," some deep aspiration that _his_ hope
might yet be _mine_.
Strange! I had no such feverish wish to turn him from the faith of his
fathers. I thought Romanism wrong, a great mixed image of gold and
clay; but it seemed to me that _this_ Romanist held the purer
elements of his creed with an innocency of heart which God must love.
The preceding conversation passed between eight and nine o'clock of
the evening, in a schoolroom of the quiet Rue Fossette, opening on a
sequestered garden. Probably about the same, or a somewhat later hour
of the succeeding evening, its echoes, collected by holy obedience,
were breathed verbatim in an attent ear, at the panel of a
confessional, in the hoary church of the Magi. It ensued that Pere
Silas paid a visit to Madame Beck, and stirred by I know not what
mixture of motives, persuaded her to let him undertake for a time the
Englishwoman's spiritual direction.
Hereupon I was put through a course of reading--that is, I just
glanced at the books lent me; they were too little in my way to be
thoroughly read, marked, learned, or inwardly digested. And besides, I
had a book up-stairs, under my pillow, whereof certain chapters
satisfied my needs in the article of spiritual lore, furnishing such
precept and example as, to my heart's core, I was convinced could not
be improved on.
Then Pere Silas showed me the fair side of Rome, her good works; and
bade me judge the tree by its fruits.
In answer, I felt and I avowed that these works were _not_ the
fruits of Rome; they were but her abundant blossoming, but the fair
promise she showed the world, That bloom, when set, savoured not of
charity; the apple full formed was ignorance, abasement, and bigotry.
Out of men's afflictions and affections were forged the rivets of
their servitude. Poverty was fed and clothed, and sheltered, to bind
it by obligation to "the Church;" orphanage was reared and educated
that it might grow up in the fold of "the Church;" sickness was tended
that it might die after the formula and in the ordinance of "the
Church;" and men were overwrought, and women most murderously
sacrificed, and all laid down a world God made pleasant for his
creatures' good, and took up a cross, monstrous in its galling weight,
that they might serve Rome, prove her sanctity, confirm her power, and
spread the reign of her tyrant "Church."
For man's good was little done; for God's glory, less. A thousand ways
were opened with pain, with blood-sweats, with lavishing of life;
mountains were cloven through their breasts, and rocks were split to
their base; and all for what? That a Priesthood might march straight
on and straight upward to an all-dominating eminence, whence they
might at last stretch the sceptre of their Moloch "Church."
It will not be. God is not with Rome, and, were human sorrows still
for the Son of God, would he not mourn over her cruelties and
ambitions, as once he mourned over the crimes and woes of doomed
Jerusalem!
Oh, lovers of power! Oh, mitred aspirants for this world's kingdoms!
an hour will come, even to you, when it will be well for your hearts--
pausing faint at each broken beat--that there is a Mercy beyond human
compassions, a Love, stronger than this strong death which even you
must face, and before it, fall; a Charity more potent than any sin,
even yours; a Pity which redeems worlds--nay, absolves Priests.
* * * * *
My third temptation was held out in the pomp of Rome--the glory of her
kingdom. I was taken to the churches on solemn occasions--days of fete
and state; I was shown the Papal ritual and ceremonial. I looked at
it.
Many people--men and women--no doubt far my superiors in a thousand
ways, have felt this display impressive, have declared that though
their Reason protested, their Imagination was subjugated. I cannot say
the same. Neither full procession, nor high mass, nor