she was in the art of
surveillance, it was next to impossible that a casket could be thrown
into her garden, or an interloper could cross her walks to seek it,
without that she, in shaken branch, passing shade, unwonted footfall,
or stilly murmur (and though Dr. John had spoken very low in the few
words he dropped me, yet the hum of his man's voice pervaded, I
thought, the whole conventual ground)--without, I say, that she should
have caught intimation of things extraordinary transpiring on her
premises. _What_ things, she might by no means see, or at that
time be able to discover; but a delicious little ravelled plot lay
tempting her to disentanglement; and in the midst, folded round and
round in cobwebs, had she not secured "Meess Lucie" clumsily involved,
like the foolish fly she was?
CHAPTER XIII.
A SNEEZE OUT OF SEASON.
I had occasion to smile--nay, to laugh, at Madame again, within the
space of four and twenty hours after the little scene treated of in
the last chapter.
Villette owns a climate as variable, though not so humid, as that of
any English town. A night of high wind followed upon that soft sunset,
and all the next day was one of dry storm--dark, beclouded, yet
rainless,--the streets were dim with sand and dust, whirled from the
boulevards. I know not that even lovely weather would have tempted me
to spend the evening-time of study and recreation where I had spent it
yesterday. My alley, and, indeed, all the walks and shrubs in the
garden, had acquired a new, but not a pleasant interest; their
seclusion was now become precarious; their calm--insecure. That
casement which rained billets, had vulgarized the once dear nook it
overlooked; and elsewhere, the eyes of the flowers had gained vision,
and the knots in the tree-boles listened like secret ears. Some plants
there were, indeed, trodden down by Dr. John in his search, and his
hasty and heedless progress, which I wished to prop up, water, and
revive; some footmarks, too, he had left on the beds: but these, in
spite of the strong wind, I found a moment's leisure to efface very
early in the morning, ere common eyes had discovered them. With a
pensive sort of content, I sat down to my desk and my German, while
the pupils settled to their evening lessons; and the other teachers
took up their needlework.
The scene of the "etude du soir" was always the refectory, a much
smaller apartment than any of the three classes or schoolrooms; for
here none, save the boarders, were ever admitted, and these numbered
only a score. Two lamps hung from the ceiling over the two tables;
these were lit at dusk, and their kindling was the signal for school-
books being set aside, a grave demeanour assumed, general silence
enforced, and then commenced "la lecture pieuse." This said "lecture
pieuse" was, I soon found, mainly designed as a wholesome
mortification of the Intellect, a useful humiliation of the Reason;
and such a dose for Common Sense as she might digest at her leisure,
and thrive on as she best could.
The book brought out (it was never changed, but when finished,
recommenced) was a venerable volume, old as the hills--grey as the
Hotel de Ville.
I would have given two francs for the chance of getting that book once
into my bands, turning over the sacred yellow leaves, ascertaining the
title, and perusing with my own eyes the enormous figments which, as
an unworthy heretic, it was only permitted me to drink in with my
bewildered ears. This book contained legends of the saints. Good God!
(I speak the words reverently) what legends they were. What
gasconading rascals those saints must have been, if they first boasted
these exploits or invented these miracles. These legends, however,
were no more than monkish extravagances, over which one laughed
inwardly; there were, besides, priestly matters, and the priestcraft
of the book was far worse than its monkery. The ears burned on each
side of my head as I listened, perforce, to tales of moral martyrdom
inflicted by Rome; the dread boasts of confessors, who had wickedly
abused their office, trampling to deep degradation high-born ladies,
making of countesses and princesses the most tormented slaves under
the sun. Stories like that of Conrad and Elizabeth of Hungary,
recurred again and again, with all its dreadful viciousness, sickening
tyranny and black impiety: tales that were nightmares of oppression,
privation, and agony.
I sat out this "lecture pieuse" for some nights as well as I could,
and as quietly too; only once breaking off the points of my scissors
by involuntarily sticking them somewhat deep in the worm-eaten board
of the table before me. But, at last, it made me so burning hot, and
my temples, and my heart, and my wrist throbbed so fast, and my sleep
afterwards was so broken with excitement, that I could sit no longer.
Prudence recommended henceforward a swift clearance of my person from
the place, the moment that guilty old book was brought out. No Mause
Headrigg ever felt a stronger call to take up her testimony against
Sergeant Bothwell, than I--to speak my mind in this matter of the
popish "lecture pieuse." However, I did manage somehow to curb and
rein in; and though always, as soon as Rosine came to light the lamps,
I shot from the room quickly, yet also I did it quietly; seizing that
vantage moment given by the little bustle before the dead silence, and
vanishing whilst the boarders put their books away.
When I vanished--it was into darkness; candles were not allowed to be
carried about, and the teacher who forsook the refectory, had only the
unlit hall, schoolroom, or bedroom, as a refuge. In winter I sought
the long classes, and paced them fast to keep myself warm--fortunate
if the moon shone, and if there were only stars, soon reconciled to
their dim gleam, or even to the total eclipse of their absence. In
summer it was never quite dark, and then I went up-stairs to my own
quarter of the long dormitory, opened my own casement (that chamber
was lit by five casements large as great doors), and leaning out,
looked forth upon the city beyond the garden, and listened to band-
music from the park or the palace-square, thinking meantime my own
thoughts, living my own life, in my own still, shadow-world.
This evening, fugitive as usual before the Pope and his works, I
mounted the staircase, approached the dormitory, and