was, thence I had been watching him; but there
I could not find courage to await his approach. He had turned so
suddenly, he strode so fast, he looked so strange; the coward within
me grew pale, shrank and--not waiting to listen to reason, and hearing
the shrubs crush and the gravel crunch to his advance--she was gone on
the wings of panic.
Nor did I pause till I had taken sanctuary in the oratory, now empty.
Listening there with beating pulses, and an unaccountable, undefined
apprehension, I heard him pass through all the schoolrooms, clashing
the doors impatiently as he went; I heard him invade the refectory
which the "lecture pieuse" was now holding under hallowed constraint;
I heard him pronounce these words--"Ou est Mademoiselle Lucie?"
And just as, summoning my courage, I was preparing to go down and do
what, after all, I most wished to do in the world--viz., meet him--the
wiry voice of St. Pierre replied glibly and falsely, "Elle est au
lit." And he passed, with the stamp of vexation, into the corridor.
There Madame Beck met, captured, chid, convoyed to the street-door,
and finally dismissed him.
As that street-door closed, a sudden amazement at my own perverse
proceeding struck like a blow upon me. I felt from the first it was me
he wanted--me he was seeking--and had not I wanted him too? What,
then, had carried me away? What had rapt me beyond his reach? He had
something to tell: he was going to tell me that something: my ear
strained its nerve to hear it, and I had made the confidence
impossible. Yearning to listen and console, while I thought audience
and solace beyond hope's reach--no sooner did opportunity suddenly and
fully arrive, than I evaded it as I would have evaded the levelled
shaft of mortality.
Well, my insane inconsistency had its reward. Instead of the comfort,
the certain satisfaction, I might have won--could I but have put
choking panic down, and stood firm two minutes--here was dead blank,
dark doubt, and drear suspense.
I took my wages to my pillow, and passed the night counting them.
CHAPTER XXXIV.
MALEVOLA.
Madame Beck called me on Thursday afternoon, and asked whether I had
any occupation to hinder me from going into town and executing some
little commissions for her at the shops.
Being disengaged, and placing myself at her service, I was presently
furnished with a list of the wools, silks, embroidering thread,
etcetera, wanted in the pupils' work, and having equipped myself in a
manner suiting the threatening aspect of a cloudy and sultry day, I
was just drawing the spring-bolt of the street-door, in act to issue
forth, when Madame's voice again summoned me to the salle-a-manger.
"Pardon, Meess Lucie!" cried she, in the seeming haste of an impromptu
thought, "I have just recollected one more errand for you, if your
good-nature will not deem itself over-burdened?"
Of course I "confounded myself" in asseverations to the contrary; and
Madame, running into the little salon, brought thence a pretty basket,
filled with fine hothouse fruit, rosy, perfect, and tempting, reposing
amongst the dark green, wax-like leaves, and pale yellow stars of, I
know not what, exotic plant.
"There," she said, "it is not heavy, and will not shame your neat
toilette, as if it were a household, servant-like detail. Do me the
favour to leave this little basket at the house of Madame Walravens,
with my felicitations on her fete. She lives down in the old town,
Numero 3, Rue des Mages. I fear you will find the walk rather long,
but you have the whole afternoon before you, and do not hurry; if you
are not back in time for dinner, I will order a portion to be saved,
or Goton, with whom you are a favourite, will have pleasure in tossing
up some trifle, for your especial benefit. You shall not be forgotten,
ma bonne Meess. And oh! please!" (calling me back once more) "be sure
to insist on seeing Madame Walravens herself, and giving the basket
into her own hands, in order that there may be no mistake, for she is
rather a punctilious personage. Adieu! Au revoir!"
And at last I got away. The shop commissions took some time to
execute, that choosing and matching of silks and wools being always a
tedious business, but at last I got through my list. The patterns for
the slippers, the bell-ropes, the cabas were selected--the slides and
tassels for the purses chosen--the whole "tripotage," in short, was
off my mind; nothing but the fruit and the felicitations remained to
be attended to.
I rather liked the prospect of a long walk, deep into the old and grim
Basse-Ville; and I liked it no worse because the evening sky, over the
city, was settling into a mass of black-blue metal, heated at the rim,
and inflaming slowly to a heavy red.
I fear a high wind, because storm demands that exertion of strength
and use of action I always yield with pain; but the sullen down-fall,
the thick snow-descent, or dark rush of rain, ask only resignation--
the quiet abandonment of garments and person to be, drenched. In
return, it sweeps a great capital clean before you; it makes you a
quiet path through broad, grand streets; it petrifies a living city as
if by eastern enchantment; it transforms a Villette into a Tadmor.
Let, then, the rains fall, and the floods descend--only I must first
get rid of this basket of fruit.
An unknown clock from an unknown tower (Jean Baptiste's voice was now
too distant to be audible) was tolling the third quarter past five,
when I reached that street and house whereof Madame Beck had given me
the address. It was no street at all; it seemed rather to be part of a
square: it was quiet, grass grew between the broad grey flags, the
houses were large and looked very old--behind them rose the appearance
of trees, indicating gardens at the back. Antiquity brooded above this
region, business was banished thence. Rich men had once possessed this
quarter, and once grandeur had made her seat here. That church, whose
dark, half-ruinous turrets overlooked the square, was the venerable
and formerly opulent shrine of the Magi. But wealth and greatness had
long since stretched their gilded pinions and fled hence, leaving
these their ancient nests, perhaps to house Penury for a time, or
perhaps to stand cold and empty, mouldering untenanted in the course
of winters.
As I crossed this deserted "place," on whose pavement drops almost