had adopted, his success was now quite decided.
Within the last three months he had taken this house (a small chateau,
they told me, about half a league without the Porte de Crecy); this
country site being chosen for the sake of his mother's health, with
which town air did not now agree. Hither he had invited Mrs. Bretton,
and she, on leaving England, had brought with her such residue
furniture of the former St. Ann's Street mansion as she had thought
fit to keep unsold. Hence my bewilderment at the phantoms of chairs,
and the wraiths of looking-glasses, tea-urns, and teacups.
As the clock struck eleven, Dr. John stopped his mother.
"Miss Snowe must retire now," he said; "she is beginning to look very
pale. To-morrow I will venture to put some questions respecting the
cause of her loss of health. She is much changed, indeed, since last
July, when I saw her enact with no little spirit the part of a very
killing fine gentleman. As to last night's catastrophe, I am sure
thereby hangs a tale, but we will inquire no further this evening.
Good-night, Miss Lucy."
And so he kindly led me to the door, and holding a wax-candle, lighted
me up the one flight of stairs.
When I had said my prayers, and when I was undressed and laid down, I
felt that I still had friends. Friends, not professing vehement
attachment, not offering the tender solace of well-matched and
congenial relationship; on whom, therefore, but moderate demand of
affection was to be made, of whom but moderate expectation formed; but
towards whom my heart softened instinctively, and yearned with an
importunate gratitude, which I entreated Reason betimes to check.
"Do not let me think of them too often, too much, too fondly," I
implored: "let me be content with a temperate draught of this living
stream: let me not run athirst, and apply passionately to its welcome
waters: let me not imagine in them a sweeter taste than earth's
fountains know. Oh! would to God I may be enabled to feel enough
sustained by an occasional, amicable intercourse, rare, brief,
unengrossing and tranquil: quite tranquil!"
Still repeating this word, I turned to my pillow; and _still_
repeating it, I steeped that pillow with tears.
CHAPTER XVII.
LA TERRASSE.
These struggles with the natural character, the strong native bent of
the heart, may seem futile and fruitless, but in the end they do good.
They tend, however slightly, to give the actions, the conduct, that
turn which Reason approves, and which Feeling, perhaps, too often
opposes: they certainly make a difference in the general tenour of a
life, and enable it to be better regulated, more equable, quieter on
the surface; and it is on the surface only the common gaze will fall.
As to what lies below, leave that with God. Man, your equal, weak as
you, and not fit to be your judge, may be shut out thence: take it to
your Maker--show Him the secrets of the spirit He gave--ask Him how
you are to bear the pains He has appointed--kneel in His presence, and
pray with faith for light in darkness, for strength in piteous
weakness, for patience in extreme need. Certainly, at some hour,
though perhaps not _your_ hour, the waiting waters will stir; in
_some_ shape, though perhaps not the shape you dreamed, which
your heart loved, and for which it bled, the healing herald will
descend, the cripple and the blind, and the dumb, and the possessed
will be led to bathe. Herald, come quickly! Thousands lie round the
pool, weeping and despairing, to see it, through slow years, stagnant.
Long are the "times" of Heaven: the orbits of angel messengers seem
wide to mortal vision; they may enring ages: the cycle of one
departure and return may clasp unnumbered generations; and dust,
kindling to brief suffering life, and through pain, passing back to
dust, may meanwhile perish out of memory again, and yet again. To how
many maimed and mourning millions is the first and sole angel
visitant, him easterns call Azrael!
I tried to get up next morning, but while I was dressing, and at
intervals drinking cold water from the _carafe_ on my washstand,
with design to brace up that trembling weakness which made dressing so
difficult, in came Mrs. Bretton.
"Here is an absurdity!" was her morning accost. "Not so," she added,
and dealing with me at once in her own brusque, energetic fashion--
that fashion which I used formerly to enjoy seeing applied to her son,
and by him vigorously resisted--in two minutes she consigned me
captive to the French bed.
"There you lie till afternoon," said she. "My boy left orders before
he went out that such should be the case, and I can assure you my son
is master and must be obeyed. Presently you shall have breakfast."
Presently she brought that meal--brought it with her own active hands
--not leaving me to servants. She seated herself on the bed while I
ate. Now it is not everybody, even amongst our respected friends and
esteemed acquaintance, whom we like to have near us, whom we like to
watch us, to wait on us, to approach us with the proximity of a nurse
to a patient. It is not every friend whose eye is a light in a sick
room, whose presence is there a solace: but all this was Mrs. Bretton
to me; all this she had ever been. Food or drink never pleased me so
well as when it came through her hands. I do not remember the occasion
when her entrance into a room had not made that room cheerier. Our
natures own predilections and antipathies alike strange. There are
people from whom we secretly shrink, whom we would personally avoid,
though reason confesses that they are good people: there are others
with faults of temper, &c., evident enough, beside whom we live
content, as if the air about them did us good. My godmother's lively
black eye and clear brunette cheek, her warm, prompt hand, her self-
reliant mood, her decided bearing, were all beneficial to me as the
atmosphere of some salubrious climate. Her son used to call her "the
old lady;" it filled me with pleasant wonder to note how the alacrity
and power of five-and-twenty still breathed from her and around her.
"I would bring my work here," she said, as she took from me the
emptied teacup, "and sit with you the whole day, if that overbearing
John Graham had not