Louisa had a carriage and stature fit for a
princess. She is a comely and a good woman now. The lad is like her; I
have always thought so, and favoured and wished him well. Now he
repays me by this robbery! My little treasure used to love her old
father dearly and truly. It is all over now, doubtless--I am an
incumbrance."
The door opened--his "little treasure" came in. She was dressed, so to
speak, in evening beauty; that animation which sometimes comes with
the close of day, warmed her eye and cheek; a tinge of summer crimson
heightened her complexion; her curls fell full and long on her lily
neck; her white dress suited the heat of June. Thinking me alone, she
had brought in her hand the letter just written--brought it folded but
unsealed. I was to read it. When she saw her father, her tripping step
faltered a little, paused a moment--the colour in her cheek flowed
rosy over her whole face.
"Polly," said M. de Bassompierre, in a low voice, with a grave smile,
"do you blush at seeing papa? That is something new."
"I don't blush--I never _do_ blush," affirmed she, while another
eddy from the heart sent up its scarlet. "But I thought you were in
the dining-room, and I wanted Lucy."
"You thought I was with John Graham Bretton, I suppose? But he has
just been called out: he will be back soon, Polly. He can post your
letter for you; it will save Matthieu a 'course,' as he calls it."
"I don't post letters," said she, rather pettishly.
"What do you do with them, then?--come here and tell me."
Both her mind and gesture seemed to hesitate a second--to say "Shall I
come?"--but she approached.
"How long is it since you became a letter-writer, Polly? It only seems
yesterday when you were at your pot-hooks, labouring away absolutely
with both hands at the pen."
"Papa, they are not letters to send to the post in your letter-bag;
they are only notes, which I give now and then into the person's
hands, just to satisfy."
"The person! That means Miss Snowe, I suppose?"
"No, papa--not Lucy."
"Who then? Perhaps Mrs. Bretton?"
"No, papa--not Mrs. Bretton."
"Who, then, my little daughter? Tell papa the truth."
"Oh, papa!" she cried with earnestness, "I will--I _will_ tell
you the truth--all the truth; I am glad to tell you--glad, though I
tremble."
She _did_ tremble: growing excitement, kindling feeling, and also
gathering courage, shook her.
"I hate to hide my actions from you, papa. I fear you and love you
above everything but God. Read the letter; look at the address."
She laid it on his knee. He took it up and read it through; his hand
shaking, his eyes glistening meantime.
He re-folded it, and viewed the writer with a strange, tender,
mournful amaze.
"Can _she_ write so--the little thing that stood at my knee but
yesterday? Can she feel so?"
"Papa, is it wrong? Does it pain you?"
"There is nothing wrong in it, my innocent little Mary; but it pains
me."
"But, papa, listen! You shall not be pained by me. I would give up
everything--almost" (correcting herself); "I would die rather than
make you unhappy; that would be too wicked!"
She shuddered.
"Does the letter not please you? Must it not go? Must it be torn? It
shall, for your sake, if you order it."
"I order nothing."
"Order something, papa; express your wish; only don't hurt, don't
grieve Graham. I cannot, _cannot_ bear that. I love you, papa;
but I love Graham too--because--because--it is impossible to help it."
"This splendid Graham is a young scamp, Polly--that is my present
notion of him: it will surprise you to hear that, for my part, I do
not love him one whit. Ah! years ago I saw something in that lad's eye
I never quite fathomed--something his mother has not--a depth which
warned a man not to wade into that stream too far; now, suddenly, I
find myself taken over the crown of the head."
"Papa, you don't--you have not fallen in; you are safe on the bank;
you can do as you please; your power is despotic; you can shut me up
in a convent, and break Graham's heart to-morrow, if you choose to be
so cruel. Now, autocrat, now czar, will you do this?"
"Off with him to Siberia, red whiskers and all; I say, I don't like
him, Polly, and I wonder that you should."
"Papa," said she, "do you know you are very naughty? I never saw you
look so disagreeable, so unjust, so almost vindictive before. There is
an expression in your face which does not belong to you."
"Off with him!" pursued Mr. Home, who certainly did look sorely
crossed and annoyed--even a little bitter; "but, I suppose, if he
went, Polly would pack a bundle and run after him; her heart is fairly
won--won, and weaned from her old father."
"Papa, I say it is naughty, it is decidedly wrong, to talk in that
way. I am _not_ weaned from you, and no human being and no mortal
influence _can_ wean me."
"Be married, Polly! Espouse the red whiskers. Cease to be a daughter;
go and be a wife!"
"Red whiskers! I wonder what you mean, papa. You should take care of
prejudice. You sometimes say to me that all the Scotch, your
countrymen, are the victims of prejudice. It is proved now, I think,
when no distinction is to be made between red and deep nut-brown."
"Leave the prejudiced old Scotchman; go away."
She stood looking at him a minute. She wanted to show firmness,
superiority to taunts; knowing her father's character, guessing his
few foibles, she had expected the sort of scene which was now
transpiring; it did not take her by surprise, and she desired to let
it pass with dignity, reliant upon reaction. Her dignity stood her in
no stead. Suddenly her soul melted in her eyes; she fell on his neck:
--"I won't leave you, papa; I'll never leave you. I won't pain you!
I'll never pain you!" was her cry.
"My lamb! my treasure!" murmured the loving though rugged sire. He
said no more for the moment; indeed, those two words were hoarse.
The room was now darkening. I heard a movement, a step without.
Thinking it might be a servant coming with candles, I gently opened,
to prevent intrusion. In the ante-room stood no servant: a tall
gentleman was placing his hat on the table, drawing off his gloves
slowly--lingering, waiting, it seemed to me. He called