A bluff little personage this
maitresse was--Labassecourienne from top to toe: and how she did
slaughter the speech of Albion! However, I told her a plain tale,
which she translated. I told her how I had left my own country, intent
on extending my knowledge, and gaining my bread; how I was ready to
turn my hand to any useful thing, provided it was not wrong or
degrading; how I would be a child's-nurse, or a lady's-maid, and would
not refuse even housework adapted to my strength. Madame heard this;
and, questioning her countenance, I almost thought the tale won her
ear:
"Il n'y a que les Anglaises pour ces sortes d'entreprises," said she:
"sont-elles donc intrepides ces femmes la!"
She asked my name, my age; she sat and looked at me--not pityingly,
not with interest: never a gleam of sympathy, or a shade of
compassion, crossed her countenance during the interview. I felt she
was not one to be led an inch by her feelings: grave and considerate,
she gazed, consulting her judgment and studying my narrative. A bell
rang.
"Voila pour la priere du soir!" said she, and rose. Through her
interpreter, she desired me to depart now, and come back on the
morrow; but this did not suit me: I could not bear to return to the
perils of darkness and the street. With energy, yet with a collected
and controlled manner, I said, addressing herself personally, and not
the maitresse: "Be assured, madame, that by instantly securing my
services, your interests will be served and not injured: you will find
me one who will wish to give, in her labour, a full equivalent for her
wages; and if you hire me, it will be better that I should stay here
this night: having no acquaintance in Villette, and not possessing the
language of the country, how can I secure a lodging?"
"It is true," said she; "but at least you can give a reference?"
"None."
She inquired after my luggage: I told her when it would arrive. She
mused. At that moment a man's step was heard in the vestibule, hastily
proceeding to the outer door. (I shall go on with this part of my tale
as if I had understood all that passed; for though it was then scarce
intelligible to me, I heard it translated afterwards).
"Who goes out now?" demanded Madame Beck, listening to the tread.
"M. Paul," replied the teacher. "He came this evening to give a
reading to the first class."
"The very man I should at this moment most wish to see. Call him."
The teacher ran to the salon door. M. Paul was summoned. He entered: a
small, dark and spare man, in spectacles.
"Mon cousin," began Madame, "I want your opinion. We know your skill
in physiognomy; use it now. Read that countenance."
The little man fixed on me his spectacles: A resolute compression of
the lips, and gathering of the brow, seemed to say that he meant to
see through me, and that a veil would be no veil for him.
"I read it," he pronounced.
"Et qu'en dites vous?"
"Mais--bien des choses," was the oracular answer.
"Bad or good?"
"Of each kind, without doubt," pursued the diviner.
"May one trust her word?"
"Are you negotiating a matter of importance?"
"She wishes me to engage her as bonne or gouvernante; tells a tale
full of integrity, but gives no reference."
"She is a stranger?"
"An Englishwoman, as one may see."
"She speaks French?"
"Not a word."
"She understands it?"
"No."
"One may then speak plainly in her presence?"
"Doubtless."
He gazed steadily. "Do you need her services?"
"I could do with them. You know I am disgusted with Madame Svini."
Still he scrutinized. The judgment, when it at last came, was as
indefinite as what had gone before it.
"Engage her. If good predominates in that nature, the action will
bring its own reward; if evil--eh bien! ma cousine, ce sera toujours
une bonne oeuvre." And with a bow and a "bon soir," this vague arbiter
of my destiny vanished.
And Madame did engage me that very night--by God's blessing I was
spared the necessity of passing forth again into the lonesome, dreary,
hostile street.
CHAPTER VIII.
MADAME BECK.
Being delivered into the charge of the maitresse, I was led through a
long narrow passage into a foreign kitchen, very clean but very
strange. It seemed to contain no means of cooking--neither fireplace
nor oven; I did not understand that the great black furnace which
filled one corner, was an efficient substitute for these. Surely pride
was not already beginning its whispers in my heart; yet I felt a sense
of relief when, instead of being left in the kitchen, as I half
anticipated, I was led forward to a small inner room termed a
"cabinet." A cook in a jacket, a short petticoat and sabots, brought
my supper: to wit--some meat, nature unknown, served in an odd and
acid, but pleasant sauce; some chopped potatoes, made savoury with, I
know not what: vinegar and sugar, I think: a tartine, or slice of
bread and butter, and a baked pear. Being hungry, I ate and was
grateful.
After the "priere du soir," Madame herself came to have another look
at me. She desired me to follow her up-stairs. Through a series of the
queerest little dormitories--which, I heard afterwards, had once been
nuns' cells: for the premises were in part of ancient date--and
through the oratory--a long, low, gloomy room, where a crucifix hung,
pale, against the wall, and two tapers kept dim vigils--she conducted
me to an apartment where three children were asleep in three tiny
beds. A heated stove made the air of this room oppressive; and, to
mend matters, it was scented with an odour rather strong than
delicate: a perfume, indeed, altogether surprising and unexpected
under the circumstances, being like the combination of smoke with some
spirituous essence--a smell, in short, of whisky.
Beside a table, on which flared the remnant of a candle guttering to
waste in the socket, a coarse woman, heterogeneously clad in a broad
striped showy silk dress, and a stuff apron, sat in a chair fast
asleep. To complete the picture, and leave no doubt as to the state of
matters, a bottle and an empty glass stood at the sleeping beauty's
elbow.
Madame contemplated this remarkable tableau with great calm; she
neither smiled nor scowled; no impress of anger, disgust, or surprise,
ruffled the equality of her grave aspect; she did not even wake the
woman! Serenely pointing to a fourth bed, she intimated that it was to
be mine;