follow."
"I think you grow spiteful--impertinent."
"Lucia has trodden the stage," continued Frances. "You never seriously
thought of marrying her; you admired her originality, her fearlessness,
her energy of body and mind; you delighted in her talent, whatever that
was, whether song, dance, or dramatic representation; you worshipped her
beauty, which was of the sort after your own heart: but I am sure she
filled a sphere from whence you would never have thought of taking a
wife."
"Ingenious," remarked Hunsden; "whether true or not is another question.
Meantime, don't you feel your little lamp of a spirit wax very pale,
beside such a girandole as Lucia's?"
"Yes."
"Candid, at least; and the Professor will soon be dissatisfied with the
dim light you give?"
"Will you, monsieur?"
"My sight was always too weak to endure a blaze, Frances," and we had
now reached the wicket.
I said, a few pages back, that this is a sweet summer evening; it
is--there has been a series of lovely days, and this is the loveliest;
the hay is just carried from my fields, its perfume still lingers in the
air. Frances proposed to me, an hour or two since, to take tea out
on the lawn; I see the round table, loaded with china, placed under a
certain beech; Hunsden is expected--nay, I hear he is come--there is his
voice, laying down the law on some point with authority; that of Frances
replies; she opposes him of course. They are disputing about Victor,
of whom Hunsden affirms that his mother is making a milksop. Mrs.
Crimsworth retaliates:--
"Better a thousand times he should be a milksop than what he, Hunsden,
calls 'a fine lad;' and moreover she says that if Hunsden were to become
a fixture in the neighbourhood, and were not a mere comet, coming and
going, no one knows how, when, where, or why, she should be quite uneasy
till she had got Victor away to a school at least a hundred miles off;
for that with his mutinous maxims and unpractical dogmas, he would ruin
a score of children."
I have a word to say of Victor ere I shut this manuscript in my
desk--but it must be a brief one, for I hear the tinkle of silver on
porcelain.
Victor is as little of a pretty child as I am of a handsome man, or his
mother of a fine woman; he is pale and spare, with large eyes, as dark
as those of Frances, and as deeply set as mine. His shape is symmetrical
enough, but slight; his health is good. I never saw a child smile less
than he does, nor one who knits such a formidable brow when sitting over
a book that interests him, or while listening to tales of adventure,
peril, or wonder, narrated by his mother, Hunsden, or myself. But
though still, he is not unhappy--though serious, not morose; he has a
susceptibility to pleasurable sensations almost too keen, for it amounts
to enthusiasm. He learned to read in the old-fashioned way out of a
spelling-book at his mother's knee, and as he got on without driving by
that method, she thought it unnecessary to buy him ivory letters, or to
try any of the other inducements to learning now deemed indispensable.
When he could read, he became a glutton of books, and is so still.
His toys have been few, and he has never wanted more. For those he
possesses, he seems to have contracted a partiality amounting to
affection; this feeling, directed towards one or two living animals of
the house, strengthens almost to a passion.
Mr. Hunsden gave him a mastiff cub, which he called Yorke, after the
donor; it grew to a superb dog, whose fierceness, however, was much
modified by the companionship and caresses of its young master. He would
go nowhere, do nothing without Yorke; Yorke lay at his feet while he
learned his lessons, played with him in the garden, walked with him in
the lane and wood, sat near his chair at meals, was fed always by his
own hand, was the first thing he sought in the morning, the last he left
at night. Yorke accompanied Mr. Hunsden one day to X----, and was bitten
in the street by a dog in a rabid state. As soon as Hunsden had brought
him home, and had informed me of the circumstance, I went into the yard
and shot him where he lay licking his wound: he was dead in an instant;
he had not seen me level the gun; I stood behind him. I had scarcely
been ten minutes in the house, when my ear was struck with sounds of
anguish: I repaired to the yard once more, for they proceeded thence.
Victor was kneeling beside his dead mastiff, bent over it, embracing its
bull-like neck, and lost in a passion of the wildest woe: he saw me.
"Oh, papa, I'll never forgive you! I'll never forgive you!" was his
exclamation. "You shot Yorke--I saw it from the window. I never believed
you could be so cruel--I can love you no more!"
I had much ado to explain to him, with a steady voice, the stern
necessity of the deed; he still, with that inconsolable and bitter
accent which I cannot render, but which pierced my heart, repeated--
"He might have been cured--you should have tried--you should have burnt
the wound with a hot iron, or covered it with caustic. You gave no time;
and now it is too late--he is dead!"
He sank fairly down on the senseless carcase; I waited patiently a long
while, till his grief had somewhat exhausted him; and then I lifted him
in my arms and carried him to his mother, sure that she would comfort
him best. She had witnessed the whole scene from a window; she would not
come out for fear of increasing my difficulties by her emotion, but she
was ready now to receive him. She took him to her kind heart, and on
to her gentle lap; consoled him but with her lips, her eyes, her soft
embrace, for some time; and then, when his sobs diminished, told him
that Yorke had felt no pain in dying, and that if he had been left to
expire naturally, his end would have been most horrible; above all, she
told him that I was not cruel (for that idea seemed to give exquisite
pain to poor Victor), that it was my affection for Yorke and him which
had made