will
be no lesson of literature."
The second paragraph of her address followed, after about two minutes'
pause.
"It is probable the lessons will be suspended for a week. I shall
require at least that space of time to find an efficient substitute
for M. Emanuel. Meanwhile, it shall be our study to fill the blanks
usefully.
"Your Professor, ladies," she went on, "intends, if possible, duly to
take leave of you. At the present moment he has not leisure for that
ceremony. He is preparing for a long voyage. A very sudden and urgent
summons of duty calls him to a great distance. He has decided to leave
Europe for an indefinite time. Perhaps he may tell you more himself.
Ladies, instead of the usual lesson with M. Emanuel, you will, this
morning, read English with Mademoiselle Lucy."
She bent her head courteously, drew closer the folds of her shawl, and
passed from the classe.
A great silence fell: then a murmur went round the room: I believe
some pupils wept.
Some time elapsed. The noise, the whispering, the occasional sobbing
increased. I became conscious of a relaxation of discipline, a sort of
growing disorder, as if my girls felt that vigilance was withdrawn,
and that surveillance had virtually left the classe. Habit and the
sense of duty enabled me to rally quickly, to rise in my usual way, to
speak in my usual tone, to enjoin, and finally to establish quiet. I
made the English reading long and close. I kept them at it the whole
morning. I remember feeling a sentiment of impatience towards the
pupils who sobbed. Indeed, their emotion was not of much value: it was
only an hysteric agitation. I told them so unsparingly. I half
ridiculed them. I was severe. The truth was, I could not do with their
tears, or that gasping sound; I could not bear it. A rather weak-
minded, low-spirited pupil kept it up when the others had done;
relentless necessity obliged and assisted me so to accost her, that
she dared not carry on the demonstration, that she was forced to
conquer the convulsion.
That girl would have had a right to hate me, except that, when school
was over and her companions departing, I ordered her to stay, and when
they were gone, I did what I had never done to one among them before--
pressed her to my heart and kissed her cheek. But, this impulse
yielded to, I speedily put her out of the classe, for, upon that
poignant strain, she wept more bitterly than ever.
I filled with occupation every minute of that day, and should have
liked to sit up all night if I might have kept a candle burning; the
night, however, proved a bad time, and left bad effects, preparing me
ill for the next day's ordeal of insufferable gossip. Of course this
news fell under general discussion. Some little reserve had
accompanied the first surprise: that soon wore off; every mouth
opened; every tongue wagged; teachers, pupils, the very servants,
mouthed the name of "Emanuel." He, whose connection with the school
was contemporary with its commencement, thus suddenly to withdraw! All
felt it strange.
They talked so much, so long, so often, that, out of the very
multitude of their words and rumours, grew at last some intelligence.
About the third day I heard it said that he was to sail in a week;
then--that he was bound for the West Indies. I looked at Madame Beck's
face, and into her eyes, for disproof or confirmation of this report;
I perused her all over for information, but no part of her disclosed
more than what was unperturbed and commonplace.
"This secession was an immense loss to her," she alleged. "She did not
know how she should fill up the vacancy. She was so used to her
kinsman, he had become her right hand; what should she do without him?
She had opposed the step, but M. Paul had convinced her it was his
duty."
She said all this in public, in classe, at the dinner-table, speaking
audibly to Zelie St. Pierre.
"Why was it his duty?" I could have asked her that. I had impulses to
take hold of her suddenly, as she calmly passed me in classe, to
stretch out my hand and grasp her fast, and say, "Stop. Let us hear
the conclusion of the whole matter. _Why_ is it his duty to go
into banishment?" But Madame always addressed some other teacher, and
never looked at me, never seemed conscious I could have a care in the
question.
The week wore on. Nothing more was said about M. Emanuel coming to bid
us good-by; and none seemed anxious for his coming; none questioned
whether or not he would come; none betrayed torment lest he should
depart silent and unseen; incessantly did they talk, and never, in all
their talk, touched on this vital point. As to Madame, she of course
could see him, and say to him as much as she pleased. What should
_she_ care whether or not he appeared in the schoolroom?
The week consumed. We were told that he was going on such a day, that
his destination was "Basseterre in Guadaloupe:" the business which
called him abroad related to a friend's interests, not his own: I
thought as much.
"Basseterre in Guadaloupe." I had little sleep about this time, but
whenever I _did_ slumber, it followed infallibly that I was
quickly roused with a start, while the words "Basseterre,"
"Guadaloupe," seemed pronounced over my pillow, or ran athwart the
darkness round and before me, in zigzag characters of red or violet
light.
For what I felt there was no help, and how could I help feeling? M.
Emanuel had been very kind to me of late days; he had been growing
hourly better and kinder. It was now a month since we had settled the
theological difference, and in all that time there had been no
quarrel. Nor had our peace been the cold daughter of divorce; we had
not lived aloof; he had come oftener, he had talked with me more than
before; he had spent hours with me, with temper soothed, with eye
content, with manner home-like and mild. Kind subjects of conversation
had grown between us; he had inquired into my plans of life, and I had
communicated them; the school project pleased him; he made me repeat
it more than once, though he called it an Alnaschar dream. The jar was
over; the mutual understanding was settling and fixing;