an
establishment in this faubourg."
"Will you have the goodness to accept of a few prospectuses for
distribution in behalf of a friend of mine?" asked he, taking from his
surtout-pocket some quires of these documents, and putting them into
my hand. I looked, I read--printed in fair characters:--
"Externat de demoiselles. Numero 7, Faubourg Clotilde, Directrice,
Mademoiselle Lucy Snowe."
* * * * *
And what did I say to M. Paul Emanuel?
Certain junctures of our lives must always be difficult of recall to
memory. Certain points, crises, certain feelings, joys, griefs, and
amazements, when reviewed, must strike us as things wildered and
whirling, dim as a wheel fast spun.
I can no more remember the thoughts or the words of the ten minutes
succeeding this disclosure, than I can retrace the experience of my
earliest year of life: and yet the first thing distinct to me is the
consciousness that I was speaking very fast, repeating over and over
again:--
"Did you do this, M. Paul? Is this your house? Did you furnish it? Did
you get these papers printed? Do you mean me? Am I the directress? Is
there another Lucy Snowe? Tell me: say something."
But he would not speak. His pleased silence, his laughing down-look,
his attitude, are visible to me now.
"How is it? I must know all--_all_," I cried.
The packet of papers fell on the floor. He had extended his hand, and
I had fastened thereon, oblivious of all else.
"Ah! you said I had forgotten you all these weary days," said he.
"Poor old Emanuel! These are the thanks he gets for trudging about
three mortal weeks from house-painter to upholsterer, from cabinet-
maker to charwoman. Lucy and Lucy's cot, the sole thoughts in his
head!"
I hardly knew what to do. I first caressed the soft velvet on his
cuff, and then. I stroked the hand it surrounded. It was his
foresight, his goodness, his silent, strong, effective goodness, that
overpowered me by their proved reality. It was the assurance of his
sleepless interest which broke on me like a light from heaven; it was
his--I will dare to say it--his fond, tender look, which now shook me
indescribably. In the midst of all I forced myself to look at the
practical.
"The trouble!" I cried, "and the cost! Had you money, M. Paul?"
"Plenty of money!" said he heartily. "The disposal of my large
teaching connection put me in possession of a handsome sum with part
of it I determined to give myself the richest treat that I _have_
known or _shall_ know. I like this. I have reckoned on this hour
day and night lately. I would not come near you, because I would not
forestall it. Reserve is neither my virtue nor my vice. If I had put
myself into your power, and you had begun with your questions of look
and lip--Where have you been, M. Paul? What have you been doing? What
is your mystery?--my solitary first and last secret would presently
have unravelled itself in your lap. Now," he pursued, "you shall live
here and have a school; you shall employ yourself while I am away; you
shall think of me sometimes; you shall mind your health and happiness
for my sake, and when I come back--"
There he left a blank.
I promised to do all he told me. I promised to work hard and
willingly. "I will be your faithful steward," I said; "I trust at your
coming the account will be ready. Monsieur, monsieur, you are
_too_ good!"
In such inadequate language my feelings struggled for expression: they
could not get it; speech, brittle and unmalleable, and cold as ice,
dissolved or shivered in the effort. He watched me, still; he gently
raised his hand to stroke my hair; it touched my lips in passing; I
pressed it close, I paid it tribute. He was my king; royal for me had
been that hand's bounty; to offer homage was both a joy and a duty.
* * * * *
The afternoon hours were over, and the stiller time of evening shaded
the quiet faubourg. M. Paul claimed my hospitality; occupied and afoot
since morning, he needed refreshment; he said I should offer him
chocolate in my pretty gold and white china service. He went out and
ordered what was needful from the restaurant; he placed the small
gueridon and two chairs in the balcony outside the French window under
the screening vines. With what shy joy i accepted my part as hostess,
arranged the salver, served the benefactor-guest.
This balcony was in the rear of the house, the gardens of the faubourg
were round us, fields extended beyond. The air was still, mild, and
fresh. Above the poplars, the laurels, the cypresses, and the roses,
looked up a moon so lovely and so halcyon, the heart trembled under
her smile; a star shone subject beside her, with the unemulous ray of
pure love. In a large garden near us, a jet rose from a well, and a
pale statue leaned over the play of waters.
M. Paul talked to me. His voice was so modulated that it mixed
harmonious with the silver whisper, the gush, the musical sigh, in
which light breeze, fountain and foliage intoned their lulling vesper:
Happy hour--stay one moment! droop those plumes, rest those wings;
incline to mine that brow of Heaven! White Angel! let thy light
linger; leave its reflection on succeeding clouds; bequeath its cheer
to that time which needs a ray in retrospect!
Our meal was simple: the chocolate, the rolls, the plate of fresh
summer fruit, cherries and strawberries bedded in green leaves formed
the whole: but it was what we both liked better than a feast, and I
took a delight inexpressible in tending M. Paul. I asked him whether
his friends, Pere Silas and Madame Beck, knew what he had done--
whether they had seen my house?
"Mon amie," said he, "none knows what I have done save you and myself:
the pleasure is consecrated to us two, unshared and unprofaned. To
speak truth, there has been to me in this matter a refinement of
enjoyment I would not make vulgar by communication. Besides" (smiling)
"I wanted to prove to Miss Lucy that I _could_ keep a secret.
How often has she taunted me with lack of dignified reserve and
needful caution! How many times has she saucily insinuated that all my
affairs are the secret of Polichinelle!"
This was true enough: I had not spared him on this point, nor