feel: it
will increase his pride in you, his love for you, if either be capable
of increase. Paulina, that gentle hoar-frost of yours, surrounding so
much pure, fine flame, is a priceless privilege of nature."
"You see I feel Graham's disposition," said she. "I feel that no
delicacy can be too exquisite for his treatment."
"It is perfectly proved that you comprehend him, and then--whatever
Dr. Bretton's disposition, were he one who expected to be more nearly
met--you would still act truthfully, openly, tenderly, with your
father."
"Lucy, I trust I shall thus act always. Oh, it will be pain to wake
papa from his dream, and tell him I am no more a little girl!"
"Be in no hurry to do so, Paulina. Leave the revelation to Time and
your kind Fate. I also have noticed the gentleness of her cares for
you: doubt not she will benignantly order the circumstances, and fitly
appoint the hour. Yes: I have thought over your life just as you have
yourself thought it over; I have made comparisons like those to which
you adverted. We know not the future, but the past has been
propitious.
"As a child I feared for you; nothing that has life was ever more
susceptible than your nature in infancy: under harshness or neglect,
neither your outward nor your inward self would have ripened to what
they now are. Much pain, much fear, much struggle, would have troubled
the very lines of your features, broken their regularity, would have
harassed your nerves into the fever of habitual irritation you would
have lost in health and cheerfulness, in grace and sweetness.
Providence has protected and cultured you, not only for your own sake,
but I believe for Graham's. His star, too, was fortunate: to develop
fully the best of his nature, a companion like you was needed: there
you are, ready. You must be united. I knew it the first day I saw you
together at La Terrasse. In all that mutually concerns you and Graham
there seems to me promise, plan, harmony. I do not think the sunny
youth of either will prove the forerunner of stormy age. I think it is
deemed good that you two should live in peace and be happy--not as
angels, but as few are happy amongst mortals. Some lives _are_
thus blessed: it is God's will: it is the attesting trace and
lingering evidence of Eden. Other lives run from the first another
course. Other travellers encounter weather fitful and gusty, wild and
variable--breast adverse winds, are belated and overtaken by the early
closing winter night. Neither can this happen without the sanction of
God; and I know that, amidst His boundless works, is somewhere stored
the secret of this last fate's justice: I know that His treasures
contain the proof as the promise of its mercy."
CHAPTER XXXIII.
M. PAUL KEEPS HIS PROMISE.
On the first of May, we had all--i.e. the twenty boarders and the
four teachers--notice to rise at five o'clock of the morning, to be
dressed and ready by six, to put ourselves under the command of M. le
Professeur Emanuel, who was to head our march forth from Villette, for
it was on this day he proposed to fulfil his promise of taking us to
breakfast in the country. I, indeed, as the reader may perhaps
remember, had not had the honour of an invitation when this excursion
was first projected--rather the contrary; but on my now making
allusion to this fact, and wishing to know how it was to be, my ear
received a pull, of which I did not venture to challenge the
repetition by raising, further difficulties.
"Je vous conseille de vous faire prier," said M. Emanuel, imperially
menacing the other ear. One Napoleonic compliment, however, was
enough, so I made up my mind to be of the party.
The morning broke calm as summer, with singing of birds in the garden,
and a light dew-mist that promised heat. We all said it would be warm,
and we all felt pleasure in folding away heavy garments, and in
assuming the attire suiting a sunny season. The clean fresh print
dress, and the light straw bonnet, each made and trimmed as the French
workwoman alone can make and trim, so as to unite the utterly
unpretending with the perfectly becoming, was the rule of costume.
Nobody flaunted in faded silk; nobody wore a second-hand best article.
At six the bell rang merrily, and we poured down the staircase,
through the carre, along the corridor, into the vestibule. There stood
our Professor, wearing, not his savage-looking paletot and severe
bonnet-grec, but a young-looking belted blouse and cheerful straw hat.
He had for us all the kindest good-morrow, and most of us for him had
a thanksgiving smile. We were marshalled in order and soon started.
The streets were yet quiet, and the boulevards were fresh and peaceful
as fields. I believe we were very happy as we walked along. This chief
of ours had the secret of giving a certain impetus to happiness when
he would; just as, in an opposite mood, he could give a thrill to
fear.
He did not lead nor follow us, but walked along the line, giving a
word to every one, talking much to his favourites, and not wholly
neglecting even those he disliked. It was rather my wish, for a reason
I had, to keep slightly aloof from notice, and being paired with
Ginevra Fanshawe, bearing on my arm the dear pressure of that angel's
not unsubstantial limb--(she continued in excellent case, and I can
assure the reader it was no trifling business to bear the burden of
her loveliness; many a time in the course of that warm day I wished to
goodness there had been less of the charming commodity)--however,
having her, as I said, I tried to make her useful by interposing her
always between myself and M. Paul, shifting my place, according as I
heard him coming up to the right hand or the left. My private motive
for this manoeuvre might be traced to the circumstance of the new
print dress I wore, being pink in colour--a fact which, under our
present convoy, made me feel something as I have felt, when, clad in a
shawl with a red border, necessitated to traverse a meadow where
pastured a bull.
For awhile, the shifting system, together with some modifications in
the arrangement of a black silk scarf, answered my purpose; but, by-
and-by, he found out, that whether he came