and mine ear received a little thereof; there was
silence, and I heard a voice," saying--"In the midst of life we are in
death."
That sound, and the sensation of chill anguish accompanying it, many
would have regarded as supernatural; but I recognized it at once as the
effect of reaction. Man is ever clogged with his mortality, and it was
my mortal nature which now faltered and plained; my nerves, which jarred
and gave a false sound, because the soul, of late rushing headlong to an
aim, had overstrained the body's comparative weakness. A horror of great
darkness fell upon me; I felt my chamber invaded by one I had known
formerly, but had thought for ever departed. I was temporarily a prey to
hypochondria.
She had been my acquaintance, nay, my guest, once before in boyhood; I
had entertained her at bed and board for a year; for that space of time
I had her to myself in secret; she lay with me, she ate with me, she
walked out with me, showing me nooks in woods, hollows in hills, where
we could sit together, and where she could drop her drear veil over me,
and so hide sky and sun, grass and green tree; taking me entirely to her
death-cold bosom, and holding me with arms of bone. What tales she would
tell me at such hours! What songs she would recite in my ears! How she
would discourse to me of her own country--the grave--and again and again
promise to conduct me there ere long; and, drawing me to the very brink
of a black, sullen river, show me, on the other side, shores unequal
with mound, monument, and tablet, standing up in a glimmer more hoary
than moonlight. "Necropolis!" she would whisper, pointing to the pale
piles, and add, "It contains a mansion prepared for you."
But my boyhood was lonely, parentless; uncheered by brother or sister;
and there was no marvel that, just as I rose to youth, a sorceress,
finding me lost in vague mental wanderings, with many affections and few
objects, glowing aspirations and gloomy prospects, strong desires and
slender hopes, should lift up her illusive lamp to me in the distance,
and lure me to her vaulted home of horrors. No wonder her spells
THEN had power; but NOW, when my course was widening, my prospect
brightening; when my affections had found a rest; when my desires,
folding wings, weary with long flight, had just alighted on the very lap
of fruition, and nestled there warm, content, under the caress of a soft
hand--why did hypochondria accost me now?
I repulsed her as one would a dreaded and ghastly concubine coming to
embitter a husband's heart toward his young bride; in vain; she kept her
sway over me for that night and the next day, and eight succeeding days.
Afterwards, my spirits began slowly to recover their tone; my appetite
returned, and in a fortnight I was well. I had gone about as usual all
the time, and had said nothing to anybody of what I felt; but I was glad
when the evil spirit departed from me, and I could again seek Frances,
and sit at her side, freed from the dreadful tyranny of my demon.
CHAPTER XXIV.
ONE fine, frosty Sunday in November, Frances and I took a long walk; we
made the tour of the city by the Boulevards; and, afterwards, Frances
being a little tired, we sat down on one of those wayside seats placed
under the trees, at intervals, for the accommodation of the weary.
Frances was telling me about Switzerland; the subject animated her;
and I was just thinking that her eyes spoke full as eloquently as her
tongue, when she stopped and remarked--
"Monsieur, there is a gentleman who knows you."
I looked up; three fashionably dressed men were just then
passing--Englishmen, I knew by their air and gait as well as by their
features; in the tallest of the trio I at once recognized Mr. Hunsden;
he was in the act of lifting his hat to Frances; afterwards, he made a
grimace at me, and passed on.
"Who is he?"
"A person I knew in England."
"Why did he bow to me? He does not know me."
"Yes, he does know you, in his way."
"How, monsieur?" (She still called me "monsieur"; I could not persuade
her to adopt any more familiar term.)
"Did you not read the expression of his eyes?"
"Of his eyes? No. What did they say?"
"To you they said, 'How do you do, Wilhelmina, Crimsworth?' To me, 'So
you have found your counterpart at last; there she sits, the female of
your kind!'"
"Monsieur, you could not read all that in his eyes; He was so soon
gone."
"I read that and more, Frances; I read that he will probably call on me
this evening, or on some future occasion shortly; and I have no doubt
he will insist on being introduced to you; shall I bring him to your
rooms?"
"If you please, monsieur--I have no objection; I think, indeed, I should
rather like to see him nearer; he looks so original."
As I had anticipated, Mr. Hunsden came that evening. The first thing he
said was:--
"You need not begin boasting, Monsieur le Professeur; I know about your
appointment to ---- College, and all that; Brown has told me." Then
he intimated that he had returned from Germany but a day or two since;
afterwards, he abruptly demanded whether that was Madame Pelet-Reuter
with whom he had seen me on the Boulevards. I was going to utter a
rather emphatic negative, but on second thoughts I checked myself, and,
seeming to assent, asked what he thought of her?
"As to her, I'll come to that directly; but first I've a word for you. I
see you are a scoundrel; you've no business to be promenading about with
another man's wife. I thought you had sounder sense than to get mixed up
in foreign hodge-podge of this sort."
"But the lady?"
"She's too good for you evidently; she is like you, but something better
than you--no beauty, though; yet when she rose (for I looked back to
see you both walk away) I thought her figure and carriage good. These
foreigners understand grace. What the devil has she done with Pelet? She
has not been married to him three months--he must be a spoon!"
I would not let the mistake go too far; I did not like it much.
"Pelet? How your head runs on