equally her tendency to consider pride, hardness,
selfishness, as proofs of strength. She would trample on the neck
of humility, she would kneel at the feet of disdain; she would meet
tenderness with secret contempt, indifference she would woo with
ceaseless assiduities. Benevolence, devotedness, enthusiasm, were
her antipathies; for dissimulation and self-interest she had a
preference--they were real wisdom in her eyes; moral and physical
degradation, mental and bodily inferiority, she regarded with
indulgence; they were foils capable of being turned to good account as
set-offs for her own endowments. To violence, injustice, tyranny, she
succumbed--they were her natural masters; she had no propensity to hate,
no impulse to resist them; the indignation their behests awake in some
hearts was unknown in hers. From all this it resulted that the false and
selfish called her wise, the vulgar and debased termed her charitable,
the insolent and unjust dubbed her amiable, the conscientious and
benevolent generally at first accepted as valid her claim to be
considered one of themselves; but ere long the plating of pretension
wore off, the real material appeared below, and they laid her aside as a
deception.
CHAPTER XVI.
In the course of another fortnight I had seen sufficient of Frances
Evans Henri, to enable me to form a more definite opinion of her
character. I found her possessed in a somewhat remarkable degree of at
least two good points, viz., perseverance and a sense of duty; I
found she was really capable of applying to study, of contending with
difficulties. At first I offered her the same help which I had always
found it necessary to confer on the others; I began with unloosing for
her each knotty point, but I soon discovered that such help was regarded
by my new pupil as degrading; she recoiled from it with a certain proud
impatience. Hereupon I appointed her long lessons, and left her to solve
alone any perplexities they might present. She set to the task with
serious ardour, and having quickly accomplished one labour, eagerly
demanded more. So much for her perseverance; as to her sense of duty,
it evinced itself thus: she liked to learn, but hated to teach; her
progress as a pupil depended upon herself, and I saw that on herself she
could calculate with certainty; her success as a teacher rested partly,
perhaps chiefly, upon the will of others; it cost her a most painful
effort to enter into conflict with this foreign will, to endeavour
to bend it into subjection to her own; for in what regarded people in
general the action of her will was impeded by many scruples; it was as
unembarrassed as strong where her own affairs were concerned, and to it
she could at any time subject her inclination, if that inclination went
counter to her convictions of right; yet when called upon to wrestle
with the propensities, the habits, the faults of others, of children
especially, who are deaf to reason, and, for the most part, insensate to
persuasion, her will sometimes almost refused to act; then came in the
sense of duty, and forced the reluctant will into operation. A wasteful
expense of energy and labour was frequently the consequence; Frances
toiled for and with her pupils like a drudge, but it was long ere her
conscientious exertions were rewarded by anything like docility on their
part, because they saw that they had power over her, inasmuch as by
resisting her painful attempts to convince, persuade, control--by
forcing her to the employment of coercive measures--they could
inflict upon her exquisite suffering. Human beings--human children
especially--seldom deny themselves the pleasure of exercising a power
which they are conscious of possessing, even though that power consist
only in a capacity to make others wretched; a pupil whose sensations are
duller than those of his instructor, while his nerves are tougher and
his bodily strength perhaps greater, has an immense advantage over that
instructor, and he will generally use it relentlessly, because the very
young, very healthy, very thoughtless, know neither how to sympathize
nor how to spare. Frances, I fear, suffered much; a continual weight
seemed to oppress her spirits; I have said she did not live in the
house, and whether in her own abode, wherever that might be, she wore
the same preoccupied, unsmiling, sorrowfully resolved air that always
shaded her features under the roof of Mdlle. Reuter, I could not tell.
One day I gave, as a devoir, the trite little anecdote of Alfred tending
cakes in the herdsman's hut, to be related with amplifications. A
singular affair most of the pupils made of it; brevity was what they
had chiefly studied; the majority of the narratives were perfectly
unintelligible; those of Sylvie and Leonie Ledru alone pretended to
anything like sense and connection. Eulalie, indeed, had hit, upon a
clever expedient for at once ensuring accuracy and saving trouble; she
had obtained access somehow to an abridged history of England, and had
copied the anecdote out fair. I wrote on the margin of her production
"Stupid and deceitful," and then tore it down the middle.
Last in the pile of single-leaved devoirs, I found one of several
sheets, neatly written out and stitched together; I knew the hand, and
scarcely needed the evidence of the signature "Frances Evans Henri" to
confirm my conjecture as to the writer's identity.
Night was my usual time for correcting devoirs, and my own room the
usual scene of such task--task most onerous hitherto; and it seemed
strange to me to feel rising within me an incipient sense of interest,
as I snuffed the candle and addressed myself to the perusal of the poor
teacher's manuscript.
"Now," thought I, "I shall see a glimpse of what she really is; I shall
get an idea of the nature and extent of her powers; not that she can be
expected to express herself well in a foreign tongue, but still, if she
has any mind, here will be a reflection of it."
The narrative commenced by a description of a Saxon peasant's hut,
situated within the confines of a great, leafless, winter forest; it
represented an evening in December; flakes of snow were falling, and
the herdsman foretold a heavy storm; he summoned his wife to aid him in
collecting their flock, roaming far away on the pastoral banks of the
Thone; he warns her that it will be late ere they return. The good woman
is reluctant to quit her occupation of baking cakes for the evening
meal; but acknowledging the primary importance of securing