had just left; she
rested her chin in her hand; all that was animated and amiable
vanished from her face: she looked stony and stern, almost mortified
and morose. She sighed; a single, but a deep sigh. A loud bell rang
for morning-school. She got up; as she passed a dressing-table with a
glass upon it, she looked at her reflected image. One single white
hair streaked her nut-brown tresses; she plucked it out with a
shudder. In the full summer daylight, her face, though it still had
the colour, could plainly be seen to have lost the texture of youth;
and then, where were youth's contours? Ah, Madame! wise as you were,
even _you_ knew weakness. Never had I pitied Madame before, but
my heart softened towards her, when she turned darkly from the glass.
A calamity had come upon her. That hag Disappointment was greeting her
with a grisly "All-hail," and her soul rejected the intimacy.
But Rosine! My bewilderment there surpasses description. I embraced
five opportunities of passing her cabinet that day, with a view to
contemplating her charms, and finding out the secret of their
influence. She was pretty, young, and wore a well-made dress. All very
good points, and, I suppose, amply sufficient to account, in any
philosophic mind, for any amount of agony and distraction in a young
man, like Dr. John. Still, I could not help forming half a wish that
the said doctor were my brother; or at least that he had a sister or a
mother who would kindly sermonize him. I say _half_ a wish; I
broke it, and flung it away before it became a whole one, discovering
in good time its exquisite folly. "Somebody," I argued, "might as well
sermonize Madame about her young physician: and what good would that
do?"
I believe Madame sermonized herself. She did not behave weakly, or
make herself in any shape ridiculous. It is true she had neither
strong feelings to overcome, nor tender feelings by which to be
miserably pained. It is true likewise that she had an important
avocation, a real business to fill her time, divert her thoughts, and
divide her interest. It is especially true that she possessed a
genuine good sense which is not given to all women nor to all men; and
by dint of these combined advantages she behaved wisely--she behaved
well. Brava! once more, Madame Beck. I saw you matched against an
Apollyon of a predilection; you fought a good fight, and you overcame!
CHAPTER XII.
THE CASKET.
Behind the house at the Rue Fossette there was a garden--large,
considering that it lay in the heart of a city, and to my recollection
at this day it seems pleasant: but time, like distance, lends to
certain scenes an influence so softening; and where all is stone
around, blank wall and hot pavement, how precious seems one shrub, how
lovely an enclosed and planted spot of ground!
There went a tradition that Madame Beck's house had in old days been a
convent. That in years gone by--how long gone by I cannot tell, but I
think some centuries--before the city had over-spread this quarter,
and when it was tilled ground and avenue, and such deep and leafy
seclusion as ought to embosom a religious house-that something had
happened on this site which, rousing fear and inflicting horror, had
left to the place the inheritance of a ghost-story. A vague tale went
of a black and white nun, sometimes, on some night or nights of the
year, seen in some part of this vicinage. The ghost must have been
built out some ages ago, for there were houses all round now; but
certain convent-relics, in the shape of old and huge fruit-trees, yet
consecrated the spot; and, at the foot of one--a Methuselah of a pear-
tree, dead, all but a few boughs which still faithfully renewed their
perfumed snow in spring, and their honey-sweet pendants in autumn--you
saw, in scraping away the mossy earth between the half-bared roots, a
glimpse of slab, smooth, hard, and black. The legend went, unconfirmed
and unaccredited, but still propagated, that this was the portal of a
vault, imprisoning deep beneath that ground, on whose surface grass
grew and flowers bloomed, the bones of a girl whom a monkish conclave
of the drear middle ages had here buried alive for some sin against
her vow. Her shadow it was that tremblers had feared, through long
generations after her poor frame was dust; her black robe and white
veil that, for timid eyes, moonlight and shade had mocked, as they
fluctuated in the night-wind through the garden-thicket.
Independently of romantic rubbish, however, that old garden had its
charms. On summer mornings I used to rise early, to enjoy them alone;
on summer evenings, to linger solitary, to keep tryste with the rising
moon, or taste one kiss of the evening breeze, or fancy rather than
feel the freshness of dew descending. The turf was verdant, the
gravelled walks were white; sun-bright nasturtiums clustered beautiful
about the roots of the doddered orchard giants. There was a large
berceau, above which spread the shade of an acacia; there was a
smaller, more sequestered bower, nestled in the vines which ran all
along a high and grey wall, and gathered their tendrils in a knot of
beauty, and hung their clusters in loving profusion about the favoured
spot where jasmine and ivy met and married them.
Doubtless at high noon, in the broad, vulgar middle of the day, when
Madame Beck's large school turned out rampant, and externes and
pensionnaires were spread abroad, vying with the denizens of the boys'
college close at hand, in the brazen exercise of their lungs and
limbs--doubtless _then_ the garden was a trite, trodden-down
place enough. But at sunset or the hour of _salut_, when the
externes were gone home, and the boarders quiet at their studies;
pleasant was it then to stray down the peaceful alleys, and hear the
bells of St. Jean Baptiste peal out with their sweet, soft, exalted
sound.
I was walking thus one evening, and had been detained farther within
the verge of twilight than usual, by the still-deepening calm, the
mellow coolness, the fragrant breathing with which flowers no sunshine
could win now answered the persuasion of the dew. I saw by a light in
the oratory window that the Catholic household were then gathered to
evening prayer--a rite, from attendance on which, I now and then, as a
Protestant, exempted myself.
"One moment longer," whispered solitude and the summer