me neither by
sign nor word; yet his eye said:--"Lucy, come here." And I went.
Over his face a smile flowed, while he looked down on me: no temper,
save his own, would have expressed by a smile the sort of agitation
which now fevered him.
"M. de Bassompierre is there--is he not?" he inquired, pointing to the
library.
"Yes."
"He noticed me at dinner? He understood me?"
"Yes, Graham."
"I am brought up for judgment, then, and so is _she_?"
"Mr. Home" (we now and always continued to term him Mr. Home at times)
"is talking to his daughter."
"Ha! These are sharp moments, Lucy!"
He was quite stirred up; his young hand trembled; a vital (I was going
to write _mortal_, but such words ill apply to one all living
like him)--a vital suspense now held, now hurried, his breath: in all
this trouble his smile never faded.
"Is he _very_ angry, Lucy?"
"_She_ is very faithful, Graham."
"What will be done unto me?"
"Graham, your star must be fortunate."
"Must it? Kind prophet! So cheered, I should be a faint heart indeed
to quail. I think I find all women faithful, Lucy. I ought to love
them, and I do. My mother is good; _she_ is divine; and _you_
are true as steel. Are you not?"
"Yes, Graham."
"Then give me thy hand, my little god-sister: it is a friendly little
hand to me, and always has been. And now for the great venture. God be
with the right. Lucy, say Amen!"
He turned, and waited till I said "Amen!"--which I did to please him:
the old charm, in doing as he bid me, came back. I wished him success;
and successful I knew he would be. He was born victor, as some are
born vanquished.
"Follow me!" he said; and I followed him into Mr. Home's presence.
"Sir," he asked, "what is my sentence?"
The father looked at him: the daughter kept her face hid.
"Well, Bretton," said Mr. Home, "you have given me the usual reward of
hospitality. I entertained you; you have taken my best. I was always
glad to see you; you were glad to see the one precious thing I had.
You spoke me fair; and, meantime, I will not say you _robbed_ me,
but I am bereaved, and what I have lost, _you_, it seems, have
won."
"Sir, I cannot repent."
"Repent! Not you! You triumph, no doubt: John Graham, you descended
partly from a Highlander and a chief, and there is a trace of the Celt
in all you look, speak, and think. You have his cunning and his charm.
The red--(Well then, Polly, the _fair_) hair, the tongue of
guile, and brain of wile, are all come down by inheritance."
"Sir, I _feel_ honest enough," said Graham; and a genuine English
blush covered his face with its warm witness of sincerity. "And yet,"
he added, "I won't deny that in some respects you accuse me justly. In
your presence I have always had a thought which I dared not show you.
I did truly regard you as the possessor of the most valuable thing the
world owns for me. I wished for it: I tried for it. Sir, I ask for it
now."
"John, you ask much."
"Very much, sir. It must come from your generosity, as a gift; from
your justice, as a reward. I can never earn it."
"Ay! Listen to the Highland tongue!" said Mr. Home. "Look up, Polly!
Answer this 'braw wooer;' send him away!"
She looked up. She shyly glanced at her eager, handsome suitor. She
gazed tenderly on her furrowed sire.
"Papa, I love you both," said she; "I can take care of you both. I
need not send Graham away--he can live here; he will be no
inconvenience," she alleged with that simplicity of phraseology which
at times was wont to make both her father and Graham smile. They
smiled now.
"He will be a prodigious inconvenience to me," still persisted Mr.
Home. "I don't want him, Polly, he is too tall; he is in my way. Tell
him to march."
"You will get used to him, papa. He seemed exceedingly tall to me at
first--like a tower when I looked up at him; but, on the whole, I
would rather not have him otherwise."
"I object to him altogether, Polly; I can do without a son-in-law. I
should never have requested the best man in the land to stand to me in
that relation. Dismiss this gentleman."
"But he has known you so long, papa, and suits you so well."
"Suits _me_, forsooth! Yes; he has pretended to make my opinions
and tastes his own. He has humoured me for good reasons. I think,
Polly, you and I will bid him good-by."
"Till to-morrow only. Shake hands with Graham, papa."
"No: I think not: I am not friends with him. Don't think to coax me
between you."
"Indeed, indeed, you _are_ friends. Graham, stretch out your
right hand. Papa, put out yours. Now, let them touch. Papa, don't be
stiff; close your fingers; be pliant--there! But that is not a clasp--
it is a grasp? Papa, you grasp like a vice. You crush Graham's hand to
the bone; you hurt him!"
He must have hurt him; for he wore a massive ring, set round with
brilliants, of which the sharp facets cut into Graham's flesh and drew
blood: but pain only made Dr. John laugh, as anxiety had made him
smile.
"Come with me into my study," at last said Mr. Home to the doctor.
They went. Their intercourse was not long, but I suppose it was
conclusive. The suitor had to undergo an interrogatory and a scrutiny
on many things. Whether Dr. Bretton was at times guileful in look and
language or not, there was a sound foundation below. His answers, I
understood afterwards, evinced both wisdom and integrity. He had
managed his affairs well. He had struggled through entanglements; his
fortunes were in the way of retrieval; he proved himself in a position
to marry.
Once more the father and lover appeared in the library. M. de
Bassompierre shut the door; he pointed to his daughter.
"Take her," he said. "Take her, John Bretton: and may God deal with
you as you deal with her!"
* * * * *
Not long after, perhaps a fortnight, I saw three persons, Count de
Bassompierre, his daughter, and Dr. Graham Bretton, sitting on one
seat, under a low-spreading and umbrageous tree, in the grounds of the
palace at Bois l'Etang. They had come thither to enjoy a summer
evening: outside the magnificent