a kiss, there seemed to shine round her a halo of loving
delight. The grave and reverend seignor looked down on her as men
_do_ look on what is the apple of their eye.
"Mrs. Bretton," said he: "what am I to do with this daughter or
daughterling of mine? She neither grows in wisdom nor in stature.
Don't you find her pretty nearly as much the child as she was ten
years ago?"
"She cannot be more the child than this great boy of mine," said Mrs.
Bretton, who was in conflict with her son about some change of dress
she deemed advisable, and which he resisted. He stood leaning against
the Dutch dresser, laughing and keeping her at arm's length.
"Come, mamma," said he, "by way of compromise, and to secure for us
inward as well as outward warmth, let us have a Christmas wassail-cup,
and toast Old England here, on the hearth."
So, while the Count stood by the fire, and Paulina Mary still danced
to and fro--happy in the liberty of the wide hall-like kitchen--Mrs.
Bretton herself instructed Martha to spice and heat the wassail-bowl,
and, pouring the draught into a Bretton flagon, it was served round,
reaming hot, by means of a small silver vessel, which I recognised as
Graham's christening-cup.
"Here's to Auld Lang Syne!" said the Count; holding the glancing cup
on high. Then, looking at Mrs. Bretton.--
"We twa ha' paidlet i' the burn
Fra morning sun till dine,
But seas between us braid ha' roared
Sin' auld lane syne.
"And surely ye'll be your pint-stoup,
And surely I'll be mine;
And we'll taste a cup o' kindness yet
For auld lang syne."
"Scotch! Scotch!" cried Paulina; "papa is talking Scotch; and Scotch
he is, partly. We are Home and de Bassompierre, Caledonian and
Gallic."
"And is that a Scotch reel you are dancing, you Highland fairy?" asked
her father. "Mrs. Bretton, there will be a green ring growing up in
the middle of your kitchen shortly. I would not answer for her being
quite cannie: she is a strange little mortal."
"Tell Lucy to dance with me, papa; there is Lucy Snowe."
Mr. Home (there was still quite as much about him of plain Mr. Home as
of proud Count de Bassompierre) held his hand out to me, saying
kindly, "he remembered me well; and, even had his own memory been less
trustworthy, my name was so often on his daughter's lips, and he had
listened to so many long tales about me, I should seem like an old
acquaintance."
Every one now had tasted the wassail-cup except Paulina, whose pas de
fee, ou de fantaisie, nobody thought of interrupting to offer so
profanatory a draught; but she was not to be overlooked, nor baulked
of her mortal privileges.
"Let me taste," said she to Graham, as he was putting the cup on the
shelf of the dresser out of her reach.
Mrs. Bretton and Mr. Home were now engaged in conversation. Dr. John
had not been unobservant of the fairy's dance; he had watched it, and
he had liked it. To say nothing of the softness and beauty of the
movements, eminently grateful to his grace-loving eye, that ease in
his mother's house charmed him, for it set _him_ at ease: again
she seemed a child for him--again, almost his playmate. I wondered how
he would speak to her; I had not yet seen him address her; his first
words proved that the old days of "little Polly" had been recalled to
his mind by this evening's child-like light-heartedness.
"Your ladyship wishes for the tankard?"
"I think I said so. I think I intimated as much."
"Couldn't consent to a step of the kind on any account. Sorry for it,
but couldn't do it."
"Why? I am quite well now: it can't break my collar-bone again, or
dislocate my shoulder. Is it wine?"
"No; nor dew."
"I don't want dew; I don't like dew: but what is it?"
"Ale--strong ale--old October; brewed, perhaps, when I was born."
"It must be curious: is it good?"
"Excessively good."
And he took it down, administered to himself a second dose of this
mighty elixir, expressed in his mischievous eyes extreme contentment
with the same, and solemnly replaced the cup on the shelf.
"I should like a little," said Paulina, looking up; "I never had any
'old October:' is it sweet?"
"Perilously sweet," said Graham.
She continued to look up exactly with the countenance of a child that
longs for some prohibited dainty. At last the Doctor relented, took it
down, and indulged himself in the gratification of letting her taste
from his hand; his eyes, always expressive in the revelation of
pleasurable feelings, luminously and smilingly avowed that it
_was_ a gratification; and he prolonged it by so regulating the
position of the cup that only a drop at a time could reach the rosy,
sipping lips by which its brim was courted.
"A little more--a little more," said she, petulantly touching his hand
with the forefinger, to make him incline the cup more generously and
yieldingly. "It smells of spice and sugar, but I can't taste it; your
wrist is so stiff, and you are so stingy."
He indulged her, whispering, however, with gravity: "Don't tell my
mother or Lucy; they wouldn't approve."
"Nor do I," said she, passing into another tone and manner as soon as
she had fairly assayed the beverage, just as if it had acted upon her
like some disenchanting draught, undoing the work of a wizard: "I find
it anything but sweet; it is bitter and hot, and takes away my breath.
Your old October was only desirable while forbidden. Thank you, no
more."
And, with a slight bend--careless, but as graceful as her dance--she
glided from him and rejoined her father.
I think she had spoken truth: the child of seven was in the girl of
seventeen.
Graham looked after her a little baffled, a little puzzled; his eye
was on her a good deal during the rest of the evening, but she did not
seem to notice him.
As we ascended to the drawing-room for tea, she took her father's arm:
her natural place seemed to be at his side; her eyes and her ears were
dedicated to him. He and Mrs. Bretton were the chief talkers of our
little party, and Paulina was their best listener, attending closely
to all that was said, prompting the repetition of this or that trait
or adventure.
"And where were you at such a time, papa? And what did you say then?
And tell Mrs. Bretton what happened