corner of the picture, between the frame and
the canvas. Then I first asked, "Who sent this picture? Who thought of
me, saved it out of the wreck of Crimsworth Hall, and now commits it to
the care of its natural keeper?" I took the note from its niche; thus it
spoke:--
"There is a sort of stupid pleasure in giving a child sweets, a fool his
bells, a dog a bone. You are repaid by seeing the child besmear his face
with sugar; by witnessing how the fool's ecstasy makes a greater fool of
him than ever; by watching the dog's nature come out over his bone.
In giving William Crimsworth his mother's picture, I give him sweets,
bells, and bone all in one; what grieves me is, that I cannot behold
the result; I would have added five shillings more to my bid if the
auctioneer could only have promised me that pleasure.
"H. Y. H.
"P.S.--You said last night you positively declined adding another item
to your account with me; don't you think I've saved you that trouble?"
I muffled the picture in its green baize covering, restored it to the
case, and having transported the whole concern to my bed-room, put it
out of sight under my bed. My pleasure was now poisoned by pungent pain;
I determined to look no more till I could look at my ease. If Hunsden
had come in at that moment, I should have said to him, "I owe you
nothing, Hunsden--not a fraction of a farthing: you have paid yourself
in taunts!"
Too anxious to remain any longer quiescent, I had no sooner breakfasted,
than I repaired once more to M. Vandenhuten's, scarcely hoping to find
him at home; for a week had barely elapsed since my first call: but
fancying I might be able to glean information as to the time when his
return was expected. A better result awaited me than I had anticipated,
for though the family were yet at Ostend, M. Vandenhuten had come over
to Brussels on business for the day. He received me with the quiet
kindness of a sincere though not excitable man. I had not sat five
minutes alone with him in his bureau, before I became aware of a sense
of ease in his presence, such as I rarely experienced with strangers.
I was surprised at my own composure, for, after all, I had come on
business to me exceedingly painful--that of soliciting a favour. I asked
on what basis the calm rested--I feared it might be deceptive. Ere long
I caught a glimpse of the ground, and at once I felt assured of its
solidity; I knew where it was.
M. Vandenhuten was rich, respected, and influential; I, poor, despised
and powerless; so we stood to the world at large as members of the
world's society; but to each other, as a pair of human beings, our
positions were reversed. The Dutchman (he was not Flamand, but pure
Hollandais) was slow, cool, of rather dense intelligence, though sound
and accurate judgment; the Englishman far more nervous, active, quicker
both to plan and to practise, to conceive and to realize. The Dutchman
was benevolent, the Englishman susceptible; in short our characters
dovetailed, but my mind having more fire and action than his,
instinctively assumed and kept the predominance.
This point settled, and my position well ascertained, I addressed him
on the subject of my affairs with that genuine frankness which full
confidence can alone inspire. It was a pleasure to him to be so appealed
to; he thanked me for giving him this opportunity of using a little
exertion in my behalf. I went on to explain to him that my wish was not
so much to be helped, as to be put into the way of helping myself;
of him I did not want exertion--that was to be my part--but only
information and recommendation. Soon after I rose to go. He held out his
hand at parting--an action of greater significance with foreigners
than with Englishmen. As I exchanged a smile with him, I thought the
benevolence of his truthful face was better than the intelligence of my
own. Characters of my order experience a balm-like solace in the contact
of such souls as animated the honest breast of Victor Vandenhuten.
The next fortnight was a period of many alternations; my existence
during its lapse resembled a sky of one of those autumnal nights which
are specially haunted by meteors and falling stars. Hopes and fears,
expectations and disappointments, descended in glancing showers from
zenith to horizon; but all were transient, and darkness followed swift
each vanishing apparition. M. Vandenhuten aided me faithfully; he set me
on the track of several places, and himself made efforts to secure
them for me; but for a long time solicitation and recommendation were
vain--the door either shut in my face when I was about to walk in,
or another candidate, entering before me, rendered my further advance
useless. Feverish and roused, no disappointment arrested me; defeat
following fast on defeat served as stimulants to will. I forgot
fastidiousness, conquered reserve, thrust pride from me: I asked, I
persevered, I remonstrated, I dunned. It is so that openings are forced
into the guarded circle where Fortune sits dealing favours round. My
perseverance made me known; my importunity made me remarked. I was
inquired about; my former pupils' parents, gathering the reports of
their children, heard me spoken of as talented, and they echoed the
word: the sound, bandied about at random, came at last to ears which,
but for its universality, it might never have reached; and at the very
crisis when I had tried my last effort and knew not what to do, Fortune
looked in at me one morning, as I sat in drear and almost desperate
deliberation on my bedstead, nodded with the familiarity of an old
acquaintance--though God knows I had never met her before--and threw a
prize into my lap.
In the second week of October, 18--, I got the appointment of English
professor to all the classes of ---- College, Brussels, with a salary
of three thousand francs per annum; and the certainty of being able, by
dint of the reputation and publicity accompanying the position, to make
as much more by private means. The official notice, which communicated
this information, mentioned also that it was the strong recommendation
of M. Vandenhuten, negociant, which had turned the scale of choice in my
favour.
No sooner had I read the announcement than