give me that letter--you don't really care for it"
To this provocative speech I made no answer. Graham in mirthful mood
must not be humoured too far. Just now there was a new sort of smile
playing about his lips--very sweet, but it grieved me somehow--a new
sort of light sparkling in his eyes: not hostile, but not reassuring.
I rose to go--I bid him good-night a little sadly.
His sensitiveness--that peculiar, apprehensive, detective faculty of
his--felt in a moment the unspoken complaint--the scarce-thought
reproach. He asked quietly if I was offended. I shook my head as
implying a negative.
"Permit me, then, to speak a little seriously to you before you go.
You are in a highly nervous state. I feel sure from what is apparent
in your look and manner, however well controlled, that whilst alone
this evening in that dismal, perishing sepulchral garret--that dungeon
under the leads, smelling of damp and mould, rank with phthisis and
catarrh: a place you never ought to enter--that you saw, or
_thought_ you saw, some appearance peculiarly calculated to
impress the imagination. I know that you _are_ not, nor ever
were, subject to material terrors, fears of robbers, &c.--I am not so
sure that a visitation, bearing a spectral character, would not shake
your very mind. Be calm now. This is all a matter of the nerves, I
see: but just specify the vision."
"You will tell nobody?"
"Nobody--most certainly. You may trust me as implicitly as you did
Pere Silas. Indeed, the doctor is perhaps the safer confessor of the
two, though he has not grey hair."
"You will not laugh?"
"Perhaps I may, to do you good: but not in scorn. Lucy, I feel as a
friend towards you, though your timid nature is slow to trust."
He now looked like a friend: that indescribable smile and sparkle were
gone; those formidable arched curves of lip, nostril, eyebrow, were
depressed; repose marked his attitude--attention sobered his aspect.
Won to confidence, I told him exactly what I had seen: ere now I had
narrated to him the legend of the house--whiling away with that
narrative an hour of a certain mild October afternoon, when be and I
rode through Bois l'Etang.
He sat and thought, and while he thought, we heard them all coming
down-stairs.
"Are they going to interrupt?" said he, glancing at the door with an
annoyed expression.
"They will not come here," I answered; for we were in the little salon
where Madame never sat in the evening, and where it was by mere chance
that heat was still lingering in the stove. They passed the door and
went on to the salle-a-manger.
"Now," he pursued, "they will talk about thieves, burglars, and so on:
let them do so--mind you say nothing, and keep your resolution of
describing your nun to nobody. She may appear to you again: don't
start."
"You think then," I said, with secret horror, "she came out of my
brain, and is now gone in there, and may glide out again at an hour
and a day when I look not for her?"
"I think it a case of spectral illusion: I fear, following on and
resulting from long-continued mental conflict."
"Oh, Doctor John--I shudder at the thought of being liable to such an
illusion! It seemed so real. Is there no cure?--no preventive?"
"Happiness is the cure--a cheerful mind the preventive: cultivate
both."
No mockery in this world ever sounds to me so hollow as that of being
told to _cultivate_ happiness. What does such advice mean?
Happiness is not a potato, to be planted in mould, and tilled with
manure. Happiness is a glory shining far down upon us out of Heaven.
She is a divine dew which the soul, on certain of its summer mornings,
feels dropping upon it from the amaranth bloom and golden fruitage of
Paradise.
"Cultivate happiness!" I said briefly to the doctor: "do _you_
cultivate happiness? How do you manage?"
"I am a cheerful fellow by nature: and then ill-luck has never dogged
me. Adversity gave me and my mother one passing scowl and brush, but
we defied her, or rather laughed at her, and she went by.".
"There is no cultivation in all this."
"I do not give way to melancholy."
"Yes: I have seen you subdued by that feeling."
"About Ginevra Fanshawe--eh?"
"Did she not sometimes make you miserable?"
"Pooh! stuff! nonsense! You see I am better now."
If a laughing eye with a lively light, and a face bright with beaming
and healthy energy, could attest that he was better, better he
certainly was.
"You do not look much amiss, or greatly out of condition," I allowed.
"And why, Lucy, can't you look and feel as I do--buoyant, courageous,
and fit to defy all the nuns and flirts in Christendom? I would give
gold on the spot just to see you snap your fingers. Try the
manoeuvre."
"If I were to bring Miss Fanshawe into your presence just now?"
"I vow, Lucy, she should not move me: or, she should move me but by
one thing--true, yes, and passionate love. I would accord forgiveness
at no less a price."
"Indeed! a smile of hers would have been a fortune to you a while
since."
"Transformed, Lucy: transformed! Remember, you once called me a slave!
but I am a free man now!"
He stood up: in the port of his head, the carriage of his figure, in
his beaming eye and mien, there revealed itself a liberty which was
more than ease--a mood which was disdain of his past bondage.
"Miss Fanshawe," he pursued, "has led me through a phase of feeling
which is over: I have entered another condition, and am now much
disposed to exact love for love--passion for passion--and good measure
of it, too."
"Ah, Doctor! Doctor! you said it was your nature to pursue Love under
difficulties--to be charmed by a proud insensibility!".
He laughed, and answered, "My nature varies: the mood of one hour is
sometimes the mockery of the next. Well, Lucy" (drawing on his
gloves), "will the Nun come again to-night, think you?"
"I don't think she will."
"Give her my compliments, if she does--Dr. John's compliments--and
entreat her to have the goodness to wait a visit from him. Lucy, was
she a pretty nun? Had she a pretty face? You have not told me that
yet; and _that_ is the really important point."
"She had a white cloth over her face," said I, "but her eyes
glittered."
"Confusion to her goblin trappings!" cried he, irreverently: "but at
least she had handsome eyes--bright and soft."
"Cold and fixed," was