remember Dr. John enjoying
the drive home, eating his supper with relish, and retiring to rest
with Christian composure. It was only when I saw him really unhappy
that I felt really vexed with the fair, frail cause of his suffering.
* * * * *
A fortnight passed; I was getting once more inured to the harness of
school, and lapsing from the passionate pain of change to the palsy of
custom. One afternoon, in crossing the carre, on my way to the first
classe, where I was expected to assist at a lesson of "style and
literature," I saw, standing by one of the long and large windows,
Rosine, the portress. Her attitude, as usual, was quite nonchalante.
She always "stood at ease;" one of her hands rested in her apron-
pocket, the other at this moment held to her eyes a letter, whereof
Mademoiselle coolly perused the address, and deliberately studied the
seal.
A letter! The shape of a letter similar to that had haunted my brain
in its very core for seven days past. I had dreamed of a letter last
night. Strong magnetism drew me to that letter now; yet, whether I
should have ventured to demand of Rosine so much as a glance at that
white envelope, with the spot of red wax in the middle, I know not.
No; I think I should have sneaked past in terror of a rebuff from
Disappointment: my heart throbbed now as if I already heard the tramp
of her approach. Nervous mistake! It was the rapid step of the
Professor of Literature measuring the corridor. I fled before him.
Could I but be seated quietly at my desk before his arrival, with the
class under my orders all in disciplined readiness, he would, perhaps,
exempt me from notice; but, if caught lingering in the carre, I should
be sure to come in for a special harangue. I had time to get seated,
to enforce perfect silence, to take out my work, and to commence it
amidst the profoundest and best trained hush, ere M. Emanuel entered
with his vehement burst of latch and panel, and his deep, redundant
bow, prophetic of choler.
As usual he broke upon us like a clap of thunder; but instead of
flashing lightning-wise from the door to the estrade, his career
halted midway at my desk. Setting his face towards me and the window,
his back to the pupils and the room, he gave me a look--such a look as
might have licensed me to stand straight up and demand what he meant--
a look of scowling distrust.
"Voila! pour vous," said he, drawing his hand from his waist-coat, and
placing on my desk a letter--the very letter I had seen in Rosine's
hand--the letter whose face of enamelled white and single Cyclop's-eye
of vermilion-red had printed themselves so clear and perfect on the
retina of an inward vision. I knew it, I felt it to be the letter of
my hope, the fruition of my wish, the release from my doubt, the
ransom from my terror. This letter M. Paul, with his unwarrantably
interfering habits, had taken from the portress, and now delivered it
himself.
I might have been angry, but had not a second for the sensation. Yes:
I held in my hand not a slight note, but an envelope, which must, at
least, contain a sheet: it felt not flimsy, but firm, substantial,
satisfying. And here was the direction, "Miss Lucy Snowe," in a clean,
clear, equal, decided hand; and here was the seal, round, full, deftly
dropped by untremulous fingers, stamped with the well-cut impress of
initials, "J. G. B." I experienced a happy feeling--a glad emotion
which went warm to my heart, and ran lively through all my veins. For
once a hope was realized. I held in my hand a morsel of real solid
joy: not a dream, not an image of the brain, not one of those shadowy
chances imagination pictures, and on which humanity starves but cannot
live; not a mess of that manna I drearily eulogized awhile ago--which,
indeed, at first melts on the lips with an unspeakable and
preternatural sweetness, but which, in the end, our souls full surely
loathe; longing deliriously for natural and earth-grown food, wildly
praying Heaven's Spirits to reclaim their own spirit-dew and essence--
an aliment divine, but for mortals deadly. It was neither sweet hail
nor small coriander-seed--neither slight wafer, nor luscious honey, I
had lighted on; it was the wild, savoury mess of the hunter,
nourishing and salubrious meat, forest-fed or desert-reared, fresh,
healthful, and life-sustaining. It was what the old dying patriarch
demanded of his son Esau, promising in requital the blessing of his
last breath. It was a godsend; and I inwardly thanked the God who had
vouchsafed it. Outwardly I only thanked man, crying, "Thank you, thank
you, Monsieur!"
Monsieur curled his lip, gave me a vicious glance of the eye, and
strode to his estrade. M. Paul was not at all a good little man,
though he had good points.
Did I read my letter there and then? Did I consume the venison at once
and with haste, as if Esau's shaft flew every day?
I knew better. The cover with its address--the seal, with its three
clear letters--was bounty and abundance for the present. I stole from
the room, I procured the key of the great dormitory, which was kept
locked by day. I went to my bureau; with a sort of haste and trembling
lest Madame should creep up-stairs and spy me, I opened a drawer,
unlocked a box, and took out a case, and--having feasted my eyes with
one more look, and approached the seal with a mixture of awe and shame
and delight, to my lips--I folded the untasted treasure, yet all fair
and inviolate, in silver paper, committed it to the case, shut up box
and drawer, reclosed, relocked the dormitory, and returned to class,
feeling as if fairy tales were true, and fairy gifts no dream.
Strange, sweet insanity! And this letter, the source of my joy, I had
not yet read: did not yet know the number of its lines.
When I re-entered the schoolroom, behold M. Paul raging like a
pestilence! Some pupil had not spoken audibly or distinctly enough to
suit his ear and taste, and now she and others were weeping, and he
was raving from his estrade, almost livid. Curious to mention, as I
appeared, he fell on me.
"Was I the mistress of these