a perfect work. And no tyrant-passion
dragged him back; no enthusiasms, no foibles encumbered his way. How
well he looked at this very moment! When Paulina looked up as he
reached her side, her glance mingled at once with an encountering
glance, animated, yet modest; his colour, as he spoke to her, became
half a blush, half a glow. He stood in her presence brave and bashful:
subdued and unobtrusive, yet decided in his purpose and devoted in his
ardour. I gathered all this by one view. I did not prolong my
observation--time failed me, had inclination served: the night wore
late; Ginevra and I ought already to have been in the Rue Fossette. I
rose, and bade good-night to my godmother and M. de Bassompierre.
I know not whether Professor Emanuel had noticed my reluctant
acceptance of Dr. Bretton's badinage, or whether he perceived that I
was pained, and that, on the whole, the evening had not been one flow
of exultant enjoyment for the volatile, pleasure-loving Mademoiselle
Lucie; but, as I was leaving the room, he stepped up and inquired
whether I had any one to attend me to the Rue Fossette. The professor
_now_ spoke politely, and even deferentially, and he looked
apologetic and repentant; but I could not recognise his civility at a
word, nor meet his contrition with crude, premature oblivion. Never
hitherto had I felt seriously disposed to resent his brusqueries, or
freeze before his fierceness; what he had said to-night, however, I
considered unwarranted: my extreme disapprobation of the proceeding
must be marked, however slightly. I merely said:--"I am provided with
attendance."
Which was true, as Ginevra and I were to be sent home in the carriage;
and I passed him with the sliding obeisance with which he was wont to
be saluted in classe by pupils crossing his estrade.
Having sought my shawl, I returned to the vestibule. M. Emanuel stood
there as if waiting. He observed that the night was fine.
"Is it?" I said, with a tone and manner whose consummate chariness and
frostiness I could not but applaud. It was so seldom I could properly
act out my own resolution to be reserved and cool where I had been
grieved or hurt, that I felt almost proud of this one successful
effort. That "Is it?" sounded just like the manner of other people. I
had heard hundreds of such little minced, docked, dry phrases, from
the pursed-up coral lips of a score of self-possessed, self-sufficing
misses and mesdemoiselles. That M. Paul would not stand any prolonged
experience of this sort of dialogue I knew; but he certainly merited a
sample of the curt and arid. I believe he thought so himself, for he
took the dose quietly. He looked at my shawl and objected to its
lightness. I decidedly told him it was as heavy as I wished. Receding
aloof, and standing apart, I leaned on the banister of the stairs,
folded my shawl about me, and fixed my eyes on a dreary religious
painting darkening the wall.
Ginevra was long in coming: tedious seemed her loitering. M. Paul was
still there; my ear expected from his lips an angry tone. He came
nearer. "Now for another hiss!" thought I: had not the action been too
uncivil I could have, stopped my ears with my fingers in terror of the
thrill. Nothing happens as we expect: listen for a coo or a murmur; it
is then you will hear a cry of prey or pain. Await a piercing shriek,
an angry threat, and welcome an amicable greeting, a low kind whisper.
M. Paul spoke gently:--"Friends," said he, "do not quarrel for a word.
Tell me, was it I or ce grand fat d'Anglais" (so he profanely
denominated Dr. Bretton), "who made your eyes so humid, and your
cheeks so hot as they are even now?"
"I am not conscious of you, monsieur, or of any other having excited
such emotion as you indicate," was my answer; and in giving it, I
again surpassed my usual self, and achieved a neat, frosty falsehood.
"But what did I say?" he pursued; "tell me: I was angry: I have
forgotten my words; what were they?"
"Such as it is best to forget!" said I, still quite calm and chill.
"Then it was _my_ words which wounded you? Consider them unsaid:
permit my retractation; accord my pardon."
"I am not angry, Monsieur."
"Then you are worse than angry--grieved. Forgive me, Miss Lucy."
"M. Emanuel, I _do_ forgive you."
"Let me hear you say, in the voice natural to you, and not in that
alien tone, 'Mon ami, je vous pardonne.'"
He made me smile. Who could help smiling at his wistfulness, his
simplicity, his earnestness?
"Bon!" he cried. "Voila que le jour va poindre! Dites donc, mon ami."
"Monsieur Paul, je vous pardonne."
"I will have no monsieur: speak the other word, or I shall not believe
you sincere: another effort--_mon ami_, or else in English,--my
friend!"
Now, "my friend" had rather another sound and significancy
than "_mon ami_;" it did not breathe the same sense of domestic
and intimate affection; "_mon ami_" I could _not_ say to M.
Paul; "my friend," I could, and did say without difficulty. This
distinction existed not for him, however, and he was quite satisfied
with the English phrase. He smiled. You should have seen him smile,
reader; and you should have marked the difference between his
countenance now, and that he wore half an hour ago. I cannot affirm
that I had ever witnessed the smile of pleasure, or content, or
kindness round M. Paul's lips, or in his eyes before. The ironic, the
sarcastic, the disdainful, the passionately exultant, I had hundreds
of times seen him express by what he called a smile, but any
illuminated sign of milder or warmer feelings struck me as wholly new
in his visage. It changed it as from a mask to a face: the deep lines
left his features; the very complexion seemed clearer and fresher;
that swart, sallow, southern darkness which spoke his Spanish blood,
became displaced by a lighter hue. I know not that I have ever seen in
any other human face an equal metamorphosis from a similar cause. He
now took me to the carriage: at the same moment M. de Bassompierre
came out with his niece.
In a pretty humour was Mistress Fanshawe; she had found the evening a
grand failure: completely upset as to temper, she gave way to the most
uncontrolled moroseness as soon as we were seated, and