me act so, and that I was now almost heart-broken to see him
weep thus bitterly.
Victor would have been no true son of his father, had these
considerations, these reasons, breathed in so low, so sweet a
tone--married to caresses so benign, so tender--to looks so inspired
with pitying sympathy--produced no effect on him. They did produce an
effect: he grew calmer, rested his face on her shoulder, and lay still
in her arms. Looking up, shortly, he asked his mother to tell him over
again what she had said about Yorke having suffered no pain, and my not
being cruel; the balmy words being repeated, he again pillowed his cheek
on her breast, and was again tranquil.
Some hours after, he came to me in my library, asked if I forgave him,
and desired to be reconciled. I drew the lad to my side, and there I
kept him a good while, and had much talk with him, in the course of
which he disclosed many points of feeling and thought I approved of in my
son. I found, it is true, few elements of the "good fellow" or the "fine
fellow" in him; scant sparkles of the spirit which loves to flash over
the wine cup, or which kindles the passions to a destroying fire; but I
saw in the soil of his heart healthy and swelling germs of compassion,
affection, fidelity. I discovered in the garden of his intellect a
rich growth of wholesome principles--reason, justice, moral courage,
promised, if not blighted, a fertile bearing. So I bestowed on his large
forehead, and on his cheek--still pale with tears--a proud and contented
kiss, and sent him away comforted. Yet I saw him the next day laid on
the mound under which Yorke had been buried, his face covered with his
hands; he was melancholy for some weeks, and more than a year elapsed
before he would listen to any proposal of having another dog.
Victor learns fast. He must soon go to Eton, where, I suspect, his first
year or two will be utter wretchedness: to leave me, his mother, and his
home, will give his heart an agonized wrench; then, the fagging will not
suit him--but emulation, thirst after knowledge, the glory of success,
will stir and reward him in time. Meantime, I feel in myself a strong
repugnance to fix the hour which will uproot my sole olive branch, and
transplant it far from me; and, when I speak to Frances on the subject,
I am heard with a kind of patient pain, as though I alluded to some
fearful operation, at which her nature shudders, but from which her
fortitude will not permit her to recoil. The step must, however, be
taken, and it shall be; for, though Frances will not make a milksop of
her son, she will accustom him to a style of treatment, a forbearance,
a congenial tenderness, he will meet with from none else. She sees, as
I also see, a something in Victor's temper--a kind of electrical ardour
and power--which emits, now and then, ominous sparks; Hunsden calls it
his spirit, and says it should not be curbed. I call it the leaven of
the offending Adam, and consider that it should be, if not WHIPPED out
of him, at least soundly disciplined; and that he will be cheap of
any amount of either bodily or mental suffering which will ground him
radically in the art of self-control. Frances gives this something in
her son's marked character no name; but when it appears in the grinding
of his teeth, in the glittering of his eye, in the fierce revolt of
feeling against disappointment, mischance, sudden sorrow, or supposed
injustice, she folds him to her breast, or takes him to walk with her
alone in the wood; then she reasons with him like any philosopher, and
to reason Victor is ever accessible; then she looks at him with eyes of
love, and by love Victor can be infallibly subjugated; but will reason
or love be the weapons with which in future the world will meet his
violence? Oh, no! for that flash in his black eye--for that cloud on
his bony brow--for that compression of his statuesque lips, the lad will
some day get blows instead of blandishments--kicks instead of kisses;
then for the fit of mute fury which will sicken his body and madden
his soul; then for the ordeal of merited and salutary suffering, out of
which he will come (I trust) a wiser and a better man.
I see him now; he stands by Hunsden, who is seated on the lawn under the
beech; Hunsden's hand rests on the boy's collar, and he is instilling
God knows what principles into his ear. Victor looks well just now, for
he listens with a sort of smiling interest; he never looks so like his
mother as when he smiles--pity the sunshine breaks out so rarely! Victor
has a preference for Hunsden, full as strong as I deem desirable, being
considerably more potent decided, and indiscriminating, than any I ever
entertained for that personage myself. Frances, too, regards it with a
sort of unexpressed anxiety; while her son leans on Hunsden's knee, or
rests against his shoulder, she roves with restless movement round,
like a dove guarding its young from a hovering hawk; she says she wishes
Hunsden had children of his own, for then he would better know the
danger of inciting their pride end indulging their foibles.
Frances approaches my library window; puts aside the honeysuckle which
half covers it, and tells me tea is ready; seeing that I continue busy
she enters the room, comes near me quietly, and puts her hand on my
shoulder.
"Monsieur est trop applique."
"I shall soon have done."
She draws a chair near, and sits down to wait till I have finished; her
presence is as pleasant to my mind as the perfume of the fresh hay and
spicy flowers, as the glow of the westering sun, as the repose of the
midsummer eve are to my senses.
But Hunsden comes; I hear his step, and there he is, bending through the
lattice, from which he has thrust away the woodbine with unsparing hand,
disturbing two bees and a butterfly.
"Crimsworth! I say, Crimsworth! take that pen out of his hand, mistress,
and make him lift up his head.
"Well, Hunsden? I hear you--"
"I was at X---- yesterday! your brother Ned is getting richer than
Croesus by railway speculations; they