me, but
nobody seemed to be of my mind; nobody seemed surprised, startled, or
at a loss. The quietest commonplace answer met the strange, the dead-
disturbing, the Witch-of-Endor query of the hunchback.
"Justine Marie," said one, "is coming; she is in the kiosk; she will
be here presently."
Out of this question and reply sprang a change in the chat--chat it
still remained, easy, desultory, familiar gossip. Hint, allusion,
comment, went round the circle, but all so broken, so dependent on
references to persons not named, or circumstances not defined, that
listen as intently as I would--and I _did_ listen _now_ with
a fated interest--I could make out no more than that some scheme was
on foot, in which this ghostly Justine Marie--dead or alive--was
concerned. This family-junta seemed grasping at her somehow, for some
reason; there seemed question of a marriage, of a fortune--for whom I
could not quite make out-perhaps for Victor Kint, perhaps for Josef
Emanuel--both were bachelors. Once I thought the hints and jests
rained upon a young fair-haired foreigner of the party, whom they
called Heinrich Muehler. Amidst all the badinage, Madame Walravens
still obtruded from time to time, hoarse, cross-grained speeches; her
impatience being diverted only by an implacable surveillance of
Desiree, who could not stir but the old woman menaced her with her
staff.
"La voila!" suddenly cried one of the gentlemen, "voila Justine Marie
qui arrive!"
This moment was for me peculiar. I called up to memory the pictured
nun on the panel; present to my mind was the sad love-story; I saw in
thought the vision of the garret, the apparition of the alley, the
strange birth of the berceau; I underwent a presentiment of discovery,
a strong conviction of coming disclosure. Ah! when imagination once
runs riot where do we stop? What winter tree so bare and branchless--
what way-side, hedge-munching animal so humble, that Fancy, a passing
cloud, and a struggling moonbeam, will not clothe it in spirituality,
and make of it a phantom?
With solemn force pressed on my heart, the expectation of mystery
breaking up: hitherto I had seen this spectre only through a glass
darkly; now was I to behold it face to face. I leaned forward; I
looked.
"She comes!" cried Josef Emanuel.
The circle opened as if opening to admit a new and welcome member. At
this instant a torch chanced to be carried past; its blaze aided the
pale moon in doing justice to the crisis, in lighting to perfection
the denouement pressing on. Surely those near me must have felt some
little of the anxiety I felt, in degree so unmeted. Of that group the
coolest must have "held his breath for a time!" As for me, my life
stood still.
It is over. The moment and the nun are come. The crisis and the
revelation are passed by.
The flambeau glares still within a yard, held up in a park-keeper's
hand; its long eager tongue of flame almost licks the figure of the
Expected--there--where she stands full in my sight. What is she like?
What does she wear? How does she look? Who is she?
There are many masks in the park to-night, and as the hour wears late,
so strange a feeling of revelry and mystery begins to spread abroad,
that scarce would you discredit me, reader, were I to say that she is
like the nun of the attic, that she wears black skirts and white head-
clothes, that she looks the resurrection of the flesh, and that she is
a risen ghost.
All falsities--all figments! We will not deal in this gear. Let us be
honest, and cut, as heretofore, from the homely web of truth.
_Homely_, though, is an ill-chosen word. What I see is not
precisely homely. A girl of Villette stands there--a girl fresh from
her pensionnat. She is very comely, with the beauty indigenous to this
country. She looks well-nourished, fair, and fat of flesh. Her cheeks
are round, her eyes good; her hair is abundant. She is handsomely
dressed. She is not alone; her escort consists of three persons--two
being elderly; these she addresses as "Mon Oncle" and "Ma Tante." She
laughs, she chats; good-humoured, buxom, and blooming, she looks, at
all points, the bourgeoise belle.
"So much for Justine Marie;" so much for ghosts and mystery: not that
this last was solved--this girl certainly is not my nun: what I saw in
the garret and garden must have been taller by a span.
We have looked at the city belle; we have cursorily glanced at the
respectable old uncle and aunt. Have we a stray glance to give to the
third member of this company? Can we spare him a moment's notice? We
ought to distinguish him so far, reader; he has claims on us; we do
not now meet him for the first time. I clasped my hands very hard, and
I drew my breath very deep: I held in the cry, I devoured the
ejaculation, I forbade the start, I spoke and I stirred no more than a
stone; but I knew what I looked on; through the dimness left in my
eyes by many nights' weeping, I knew him. They said he was to sail by
the _Antigua_. Madame Beck said so. She lied, or she had uttered
what was once truth, and failed to contradict it when it became false.
The _Antigua_ was gone, and there stood Paul Emanuel.
Was I glad? A huge load left me. Was it a fact to warrant joy? I know
not. Ask first what were the circumstances attendant on this respite?
How far did this delay concern _me?_ Were there not those whom it
might touch more nearly?
After all, who may this young girl, this Justine Marie, be? Not a
stranger, reader; she is known to me by sight; she visits at the Rue
Fossette: she is often of Madame Beck's Sunday parties. She is a
relation of both the Becks and Walravens; she derives her baptismal
name from the sainted nun who would have been her aunt had she lived;
her patronymic is Sauveur; she is an heiress and an orphan, and M.
Emanuel is her guardian; some say her godfather.
The family junta wish this heiress to be married to one of their band
--which is it? Vital question--which is it?
I felt very glad now, that the drug administered in the sweet draught
had filled me with a possession which made bed and chamber
intolerable. I always, through my whole life, liked to penetrate to
the real