finical Chinese facsimiles of steel or mezzotint plates--
things about as valuable as so many achievements in worsted-work, but
I thought pretty well of them in those days.
What was the matter? My drawing, my pencils, my precious copy,
gathered into one crushed-up handful, perished from before my sight; I
myself appeared to be shaken or emptied out of my chair, as a solitary
and withered nutmeg might be emptied out of a spice-box by an excited
cook. That chair and my desk, seized by the wild paletot, one under
each sleeve, were borne afar; in a second, I followed the furniture;
in two minutes they and I were fixed in the centre of the grand salle
--a vast adjoining room, seldom used save for dancing and choral
singing-lessons--fixed with an emphasis which seemed to prohibit the
remotest hope of our ever being permitted to stir thence again.
Having partially collected my scared wits, I found myself in the
presence of two men, gentlemen, I suppose I should say--one dark, the
other light--one having a stiff, half-military air, and wearing a
braided surtout; the other partaking, in garb and bearing, more of the
careless aspect of the student or artist class: both flourishing in
full magnificence of moustaches, whiskers, and imperial. M. Emanuel
stood a little apart from these; his countenance and eyes expressed
strong choler; he held forth his hand with his tribune gesture.
"Mademoiselle," said he, "your business is to prove to these gentlemen
that I am no liar. You will answer, to the best of your ability, such
questions as they shall put. You will also write on such theme as they
shall select. In their eyes, it appears, I hold the position of an
unprincipled impostor. I write essays; and, with deliberate forgery,
sign to them my pupils' names, and boast of them as their work. You
will disprove this charge."
Grand ciel! Here was the show-trial, so long evaded, come on me like a
thunder-clap. These two fine, braided, mustachioed, sneering
personages, were none other than dandy professors of the college--
Messieurs Boissec and Rochemorte--a pair of cold-blooded fops and
pedants, sceptics, and scoffers. It seems that M. Paul had been rashly
exhibiting something I had written--something, he had never once
praised, or even mentioned, in my hearing, and which I deemed
forgotten. The essay was not remarkable at all; it only _seemed_
remarkable, compared with the average productions of foreign school-
girls; in an English establishment it would have passed scarce
noticed. Messieurs Boissec and Rochemorte had thought proper to
question its genuineness, and insinuate a cheat; I was now to bear my
testimony to the truth, and to be put to the torture of their
examination.
A memorable scene ensued.
They began with classics. A dead blank. They went on to French
history. I hardly knew Merovee from Pharamond. They tried me in
various 'ologies, and still only got a shake of the head, and an
unchanging "Je n'en sais rien."
After an expressive pause, they proceeded to matters of general
information, broaching one or two subjects which I knew pretty well,
and on which I had often reflected. M. Emanuel, who had hitherto stood
looking on, dark as the winter-solstice, brightened up somewhat; he
thought I should now show myself at least no fool.
He learned his error. Though answers to the questions surged up
fast, my mind filling like a rising well, ideas were there, but not words.
I either _could_ not, or _would_ not speak--I am not sure which:
partly, I think, my nerves had got wrong, and partly my humour was
crossed.
I heard one of my examiners--he of the braided surtout--whisper to his
co-professor, "Est-elle donc idiote?"
"Yes," I thought, "an idiot she is, and always will be, for such as
you."
But I suffered--suffered cruelly; I saw the damps gather on M. Paul's
brow, and his eye spoke a passionate yet sad reproach. He would not
believe in my total lack of popular cleverness; he thought I
_could_ be prompt if I _would_.
At last, to relieve him, the professors, and myself, I stammered out:
"Gentlemen, you had better let me go; you will get no good of me; as
you say, I am an idiot."
I wish I could have spoken with calm and dignity, or I wish my sense
had sufficed to make me hold my tongue; that traitor tongue tripped,
faltered. Beholding the judges cast on M. Emanuel a hard look of
triumph, and hearing the distressed tremor of my own voice, out I
burst in a fit of choking tears. The emotion was far more of anger
than grief; had I been a man and strong, I could have challenged that
pair on the spot--but it _was_ emotion, and I would rather have
been scourged than betrayed it.
The incapables! Could they not see at once the crude hand of a novice
in that composition they called a forgery? The subject was classical.
When M. Paul dictated the trait on which the essay was to turn, I
heard it for the first time; the matter was new to me, and I had no
material for its treatment. But I got books, read up the facts,
laboriously constructed a skeleton out of the dry bones of the real,
and then clothed them, and tried to breathe into them life, and in
this last aim I had pleasure. With me it was a difficult and anxious
time till my facts were found, selected, and properly jointed; nor
could I rest from research and effort till I was satisfied of correct
anatomy; the strength of my inward repugnance to the idea of flaw or
falsity sometimes enabled me to shun egregious blunders; but the
knowledge was not there in my head, ready and mellow; it had not been
sown in Spring, grown in Summer, harvested in Autumn, and garnered
through Winter; whatever I wanted I must go out and gather fresh;
glean of wild herbs my lapful, and shred them green into the pot.
Messieurs Boissec and Rochemorte did not perceive this. They mistook
my work for the work of a ripe scholar.
They would not yet let me go: I must sit down and write before them.
As I dipped my pen in the ink with a shaking hand, and surveyed the
white paper with eyes half-blinded and overflowing, one of my judges
began mincingly to apologize for the pain he caused.
"Nous agissons dans l'interet de la verite. Nous ne voulons pas vous
blesser," said he.
Scorn gave me nerve. I only answered,--
"Dictate, Monsieur."
Rochemorte