2 on the second landing; the first floor comprising the
abode of I know not what "prince Russe," as Graham informed me. On
ringing the bell at a second great door, we were admitted to a suite
of very handsome apartments. Announced by a servant in livery, we
entered a drawing-room whose hearth glowed with an English fire, and
whose walls gleamed with foreign mirrors. Near the hearth appeared a
little group: a slight form sunk in a deep arm-chair, one or two women
busy about it, the iron-grey gentleman anxiously looking on.
"Where is Harriet? I wish Harriet would come to me," said the girlish
voice, faintly.
"Where is Mrs. Hurst?" demanded the gentleman impatiently and somewhat
sternly of the man-servant who had admitted us.
"I am sorry to say she is gone out of town, sir; my young lady gave
her leave till to-morrow."
"Yes--I did--I did. She is gone to see her sister; I said she might
go: I remember now," interposed the young lady; "but I am so sorry,
for Manon and Louison cannot understand a word I say, and they hurt me
without meaning to do so."
Dr. John and the gentleman now interchanged greetings; and while they
passed a few minutes in consultation, I approached the easy-chair, and
seeing what the faint and sinking girl wished to have done, I did it
for her.
I was still occupied in the arrangement, when Graham drew near; he was
no less skilled in surgery than medicine, and, on examination, found
that no further advice than his own was necessary to the treatment of
the present case. He ordered her to be carried to her chamber, and
whispered to me:--"Go with the women, Lucy; they seem but dull; you
can at least direct their movements, and thus spare her some pain. She
must be touched very tenderly."
The chamber was a room shadowy with pale-blue hangings, vaporous with
curtainings and veilings of muslin; the bed seemed to me like snow-
drift and mist--spotless, soft, and gauzy. Making the women stand
apart, I undressed their mistress, without their well-meaning but
clumsy aid. I was not in a sufficiently collected mood to note with
separate distinctness every detail of the attire I removed, but I
received a general impression of refinement, delicacy, and perfect
personal cultivation; which, in a period of after-thought, offered in
my reflections a singular contrast to notes retained of Miss Ginevra
Fanshawe's appointments.
The girl was herself a small, delicate creature, but made like a
model. As I folded back her plentiful yet fine hair, so shining and
soft, and so exquisitely tended, I had under my observation a young,
pale, weary, but high-bred face. The brow was smooth and clear; the
eyebrows were distinct, but soft, and melting to a mere trace at the
temples; the eyes were a rich gift of nature--fine and full, large,
deep, seeming to hold dominion over the slighter subordinate features
--capable, probably, of much significance at another hour and under
other circumstances than the present, but now languid and suffering.
Her skin was perfectly fair, the neck and hands veined finely like the
petals of a flower; a thin glazing of the ice of pride polished this
delicate exterior, and her lip wore a curl--I doubt not inherent and
unconscious, but which, if I had seen it first with the accompaniments
of health and state, would have struck me as unwarranted, and proving
in the little lady a quite mistaken view of life and her own
consequence.
Her demeanour under the Doctor's hands at first excited a smile; it
was not puerile--rather, on the whole, patient and firm--but yet, once
or twice she addressed him with suddenness and sharpness, saying that
he hurt her, and must contrive to give her less pain; I saw her large
eyes, too, settle on his face like the solemn eyes of some pretty,
wondering child. I know not whether Graham felt this examination: if
be did, he was cautious not to check or discomfort it by any
retaliatory look. I think he performed his work with extreme care and
gentleness, sparing her what pain he could; and she acknowledged as
much, when he had done, by the words:--"Thank you, Doctor, and good-
night," very gratefully pronounced as she uttered them, however, it
was with a repetition of the serious, direct gaze, I thought, peculiar
in its gravity and intentness.
The injuries, it seems, were not dangerous: an assurance which her
father received with a smile that almost made one his friend--it was
so glad and gratified. He now expressed his obligations to Graham with
as much earnestness as was befitting an Englishman addressing one who
has served him, but is yet a stranger; he also begged him to call the
next day.
"Papa," said a voice from the veiled couch, "thank the lady, too; is
she there?"
I opened the curtain with a smile, and looked in at her. She lay now
at comparative ease; she looked pretty, though pale; her face was
delicately designed, and if at first sight it appeared proud, I
believe custom might prove it to be soft.
"I thank the lady very sincerely," said her father: "I fancy she has
been very good to my child. I think we scarcely dare tell Mrs. Hurst
who has been her substitute and done her work; she will feel at once
ashamed and jealous."
And thus, in the most friendly spirit, parting greetings were
interchanged; and refreshment having been hospitably offered, but by
us, as it was late, refused, we withdrew from the Hotel Crecy.
On our way back we repassed the theatre. All was silence and darkness:
the roaring, rushing crowd all vanished and gone--the damps, as well
as the incipient fire, extinct and forgotten. Next morning's papers
explained that it was but some loose drapery on which a spark had
fallen, and which had blazed up and been quenched in a moment.
CHAPTER XXIV.
M. DE BASSOMPIERRE.
Those who live in retirement, whose lives have fallen amid the
seclusion of schools or of other walled-in and guarded dwellings, are
liable to be suddenly and for a long while dropped out of the memory
of their friends, the denizens of a freer world. Unaccountably,
perhaps, and close upon some space of unusually frequent intercourse--
some congeries of rather exciting little circumstances, whose natural
sequel would rather seem to be the quickening than the suspension of
communication--there falls a stilly pause, a wordless silence, a long
blank of oblivion. Unbroken always is this blank; alike entire and
unexplained. The letter, the message once