as
large as a five-franc piece were now slowly darkening, I saw, in its
whole expanse, no symptom or evidence of life, except what was given
in the figure of an infirm old priest, who went past, bending and
propped on a staff--the type of eld and decay.
He had issued from the very house to which I was directed; and when I
paused before the door just closed after him, and rang the bell, he
turned to look at me. Nor did he soon avert his gaze; perhaps he
thought me, with my basket of summer fruit, and my lack of the dignity
age confers, an incongruous figure in such a scene. I know, had a
young ruddy-faced bonne opened the door to admit me, I should have
thought such a one little in harmony with her dwelling; but, when I
found myself confronted by a very old woman, wearing a very antique
peasant costume, a cap alike hideous and costly, with long flaps of
native lace, a petticoat and jacket of cloth, and sabots more like
little boats than shoes, it seemed all right, and soothingly in
character.
The expression of her face was not quite so soothing as the cut of her
costume; anything more cantankerous I have seldom seen; she would
scarcely reply to my inquiry after Madame Walravens; I believe she
would have snatched the basket of fruit from my hand, had not the old
priest, hobbling up, checked her, and himself lent an ear to the
message with which I was charged.
His apparent deafness rendered it a little difficult to make him fully
understand that I must see Madame Walravens, and consign the fruit
into her own hands. At last, however, he comprehended the fact that
such were my orders, and that duty enjoined their literal fulfilment.
Addressing the aged bonne, not in French, but in the aboriginal tongue
of Labassecour, he persuaded her, at last, to let me cross the
inhospitable threshold, and himself escorting me up-stairs, I was
ushered into a sort of salon, and there left.
The room was large, and had a fine old ceiling, and almost church-like
windows of coloured-glass; but it was desolate, and in the shadow of a
coming storm, looked strangely lowering. Within--opened a smaller
room; there, however, the blind of the single casement was closed;
through the deep gloom few details of furniture were apparent. These
few I amused myself by puzzling to make out; and, in particular, I was
attracted by the outline of a picture on the wall.
By-and-by the picture seemed to give way: to my bewilderment, it
shook, it sunk, it rolled back into nothing; its vanishing left an
opening arched, leading into an arched passage, with a mystic winding
stair; both passage and stair were of cold stone, uncarpeted and
unpainted. Down this donjon stair descended a tap, tap, like a stick;
soon there fell on the steps a shadow, and last of all, I was aware of
a substance.
Yet, was it actual substance, this appearance approaching me? this
obstruction, partially darkening the arch?
It drew near, and I saw it well. I began to comprehend where I was.
Well might this old square be named quarter of the Magi--well might
the three towers, overlooking it, own for godfathers three mystic
sages of a dead and dark art. Hoar enchantment here prevailed; a spell
had opened for me elf-land--that cell-like room, that vanishing
picture, that arch and passage, and stair of stone, were all parts of
a fairy tale. Distincter even than these scenic details stood the
chief figure--Cunegonde, the sorceress! Malevola, the evil fairy. How
was she?
She might be three feet high, but she had no shape; her skinny hands
rested upon each other, and pressed the gold knob of a wand-like ivory
staff. Her face was large, set, not upon her shoulders, but before her
breast; she seemed to have no neck; I should have said there were a
hundred years in her features, and more perhaps in her eyes--her
malign, unfriendly eyes, with thick grey brows above, and livid lids
all round. How severely they viewed me, with a sort of dull
displeasure!
This being wore a gown of brocade, dyed bright blue, full-tinted as
the gentianella flower, and covered with satin foliage in a large
pattern; over the gown a costly shawl, gorgeously bordered, and so
large for her, that its many-coloured fringe swept the floor. But her
chief points were her jewels: she had long, clear earrings, blazing
with a lustre which could not be borrowed or false; she had rings on
her skeleton hands, with thick gold hoops, and stones--purple, green,
and blood-red. Hunchbacked, dwarfish, and doting, she was adorned like
a barbarian queen.
"Que me voulez-vous?" said she, hoarsely, with the voice rather of
male than of female old age; and, indeed, a silver beard bristled her
chin.
I delivered my basket and my message.
"Is that all?" she demanded.
"It is all," said I.
"Truly, it was well worth while," she answered. "Return to Madame
Beck, and tell her I can buy fruit when I want it, et quant a ses
felicitations, je m'en moque!" And this courteous dame turned her
back.
Just as she turned, a peal of thunder broke, and a flash of lightning
blazed broad over salon and boudoir. The tale of magic seemed to
proceed with due accompaniment of the elements. The wanderer, decoyed
into the enchanted castle, heard rising, outside, the spell-wakened
tempest.
What, in all this, was I to think of Madame Beck? She owned strange
acquaintance; she offered messages and gifts at an unique shrine, and
inauspicious seemed the bearing of the uncouth thing she worshipped.
There went that sullen Sidonia, tottering and trembling like palsy
incarnate, tapping her ivory staff on the mosaic parquet, and
muttering venomously as she vanished.
Down washed the rain, deep lowered the welkin; the clouds, ruddy a
while ago, had now, through all their blackness, turned deadly pale,
as if in terror. Notwithstanding my late boast about not fearing a
shower, I hardly liked to go out under this waterspout. Then the
gleams of lightning were very fierce, the thunder crashed very near;
this storm had gathered immediately above Villette; it seemed to have
burst at the zenith; it rushed down prone; the forked, slant bolts
pierced athwart vertical torrents; red zigzags interlaced a descent
blanched as white metal: and all broke from a sky heavily black in its
swollen abundance.
Leaving Madame Walravens' inhospitable salon, I betook myself to her
cold staircase; there was a seat on the landing--there I