could say the same; for not all had
been satisfied with friendship--with its calm comfort and modest hope.
CHAPTER XXI.
REACTION.
Yet three days, and then I must go back to the _pensionnat_. I
almost numbered the moments of these days upon the clock; fain would I
have retarded their flight; but they glided by while I watched them:
they were already gone while I yet feared their departure.
"Lucy will not leave us to-day," said Mrs. Bretton, coaxingly at
breakfast; "she knows we can procure a second respite."
"I would not ask for one if I might have it for a word," said I. "I
long to get the good-by over, and to be settled in the Rue Fossette
again. I must go this morning: I must go directly; my trunk is packed
and corded."
It appeared; however, that my going depended upon Graham; he had said
he would accompany, me, and it so fell out that he was engaged all
day, and only returned home at dusk. Then ensued a little combat of
words. Mrs. Bretton and her son pressed me to remain one night more. I
could have cried, so irritated and eager was I to be gone. I longed to
leave them as the criminal on the scaffold longs for the axe to
descend: that is, I wished the pang over. How much I wished it, they
could not tell. On these points, mine was a state of mind out of their
experience.
It was dark when Dr. John handed me from the carriage at Madame Beck's
door. The lamp above was lit; it rained a November drizzle, as it had
rained all day: the lamplight gleamed on the wet pavement. Just such a
night was it as that on which, not a year ago, I had first stopped at
this very threshold; just similar was the scene. I remembered the very
shapes of the paving-stones which I had noted with idle eye, while,
with a thick-beating heart, I waited the unclosing of that door at
which I stood--a solitary and a suppliant. On that night, too, I had
briefly met him who now stood with me. Had I ever reminded him of that
rencontre, or explained it? I had not, nor ever felt the inclination
to do so: it was a pleasant thought, laid by in my own mind, and best
kept there.
Graham rung the bell. The door was instantly opened, for it was just
that period of the evening when the half-boarders took their
departure--consequently, Rosine was on the alert.
"Don't come in," said I to him; but he stepped a moment into the well-
lighted vestibule. I had not wished him to see that "the water stood
in my eyes," for his was too kind a nature ever to be needlessly shown
such signs of sorrow. He always wished to heal--to relieve--when,
physician as he was, neither cure nor alleviation were, perhaps, in
his power.
"Keep up your courage, Lucy. Think of my mother and myself as true
friends. We will not forget you."
"Nor will I forget you, Dr. John."
My trunk was now brought in. We had shaken hands; he had turned to go,
but he was not satisfied: he had not done or said enough to content
his generous impulses.
"Lucy,"--stepping after me--"shall you feel very solitary here?"
"At first I shall."
"Well, my mother will soon call to see you; and, meantime, I'll tell
you what I'll do. I'll write--just any cheerful nonsense that comes
into my head--shall I?"
"Good, gallant heart!" thought I to myself; but I shook my head,
smiling, and said, "Never think of it: impose on yourself no such
task. _You_ write to _me_!--you'll not have time."
"Oh! I will find or make time. Good-by!"
He was gone. The heavy door crashed to: the axe had fallen--the pang
was experienced.
Allowing myself no time to think or feel--swallowing tears as if they
had been wine--I passed to Madame's sitting-room to pay the necessary
visit of ceremony and respect. She received me with perfectly well-
acted cordiality--was even demonstrative, though brief, in her
welcome. In ten minutes I was dismissed. From the salle-a-manger I
proceeded to the refectory, where pupils and teachers were now
assembled for evening study: again I had a welcome, and one not, I
think, quite hollow. That over, I was free to repair to the dormitory.
"And will Graham really write?" I questioned, as I sank tired on the
edge of the bed.
Reason, coming stealthily up to me through the twilight of that long,
dim chamber, whispered sedately--"He may write once. So kind is his
nature, it may stimulate him for once to make the effort. But it
_cannot_ be continued--it _may_ not be repeated. Great were
that folly which should build on such a promise--insane that credulity
which should mistake the transitory rain-pool, holding in its hollow
one draught, for the perennial spring yielding the supply of seasons."
I bent my head: I sat thinking an hour longer. Reason still whispered
me, laying on my shoulder a withered hand, and frostily touching my
ear with the chill blue lips of eld.
"If," muttered she, "if he _should_ write, what then? Do you
meditate pleasure in replying? Ah, fool! I warn you! Brief be your
answer. Hope no delight of heart--no indulgence of intellect: grant no
expansion to feeling--give holiday to no single faculty: dally with no
friendly exchange: foster no genial intercommunion...."
"But I have talked to Graham and you did not chide," I pleaded.
"No," said she, "I needed not. Talk for you is good discipline. You
converse imperfectly. While you speak, there can be no oblivion of
inferiority--no encouragement to delusion: pain, privation, penury
stamp your language...."
"But," I again broke in, "where the bodily presence is weak and the
speech contemptible, surely there cannot be error in making written
language the medium of better utterance than faltering lips can
achieve?"
Reason only answered, "At your peril you cherish that idea, or suffer
its influence to animate any writing of yours!"
"But if I feel, may I _never_ express?"
"_Never!_" declared Reason.
I groaned under her bitter sternness. Never--never--oh, hard word!
This hag, this Reason, would not let me look up, or smile, or hope:
she could not rest unless I were altogether crushed, cowed, broken-in,
and broken-down. According to her, I was born only to work for a piece
of bread, to await the pains of death, and steadily through all life
to despond. Reason might be right; yet no wonder we are glad at times
to defy her, to rush