ear his malign glee
over their scant measure. For my part, I never troubled myself about
this penury. I dearly like to think my own thoughts; I had great
pleasure in reading a few books, but not many: preferring always those
on whose style or sentiment the writer's individual nature was plainly
stamped; flagging inevitably over characterless books, however clever
and meritorious: perceiving well that, as far as my own mind was
concerned, God had limited its powers and, its action--thankful, I
trust, for the gift bestowed, but unambitious of higher endowments,
not restlessly eager after higher culture.
The polite pupil was scarcely gone, when, unceremoniously, without
tap, in burst a second intruder. Had I been blind I should have known
who this was. A constitutional reserve of manner had by this time told
with wholesome and, for me, commodious effect, on the manners of my
co-inmates; rarely did I now suffer from rude or intrusive treatment.
When I first came, it would happen once and again that a blunt German
would clap me on the shoulder, and ask me to run a race; or a riotous
Labassecourienne seize me by the arm and drag me towards the
playground: urgent proposals to take a swing at the "Pas de Geant," or
to join in a certain romping hide-and-seek game called "Un, deux,
trois," were formerly also of hourly occurrence; but all these little
attentions had ceased some time ago--ceased, too, without my finding
it necessary to be at the trouble of point-blank cutting them short. I
had now no familiar demonstration to dread or endure, save from one
quarter; and as that was English I could bear it. Ginevra Fanshawe
made no scruple of--at times--catching me as I was crossing the carre,
whirling me round in a compulsory waltz, and heartily enjoying the
mental and physical discomfiture her proceeding induced. Ginevra
Fanshawe it was who now broke in upon "my learned leisure." She
carried a huge music-book under her arm.
"Go to your practising," said I to her at once: "away with you to the
little salon!"
"Not till I have had a talk with you, chere amie. I know where you
have been spending your vacation, and how you have commenced
sacrificing to the graces, and enjoying life like any other belle. I
saw you at the concert the other night, dressed, actually, like
anybody else. Who is your tailleuse?"
"Tittle-tattle: how prettily it begins! My tailleuse!--a fiddlestick!
Come, sheer off, Ginevra. I really don't want your company."
"But when I want yours so much, ange farouche, what does a little
reluctance on your part signify? Dieu merci! we know how to manoeuvre
with our gifted compatriote--the learned 'ourse Britannique.' And so,
Ourson, you know Isidore?"
"I know John Bretton."
"Oh, hush!" (putting her fingers in her ears) "you crack my tympanums
with your rude Anglicisms. But, how is our well-beloved John? Do tell
me about him. The poor man must be in a sad way. What did he say to my
behaviour the other night? Wasn't I cruel?"
"Do you think I noticed you?"
"It was a delightful evening. Oh, that divine de Hamal! And then to
watch the other sulking and dying in the distance; and the old lady--
my future mamma-in-law! But I am afraid I and Lady Sara were a little
rude in quizzing her."
"Lady Sara never quizzed her at all; and for what _you_ did,
don't make yourself in the least uneasy: Mrs. Bretton will survive
_your_ sneer."
"She may: old ladies are tough; but that poor son of hers! Do tell me
what he said: I saw he was terribly cut up."
"He said you looked as if at heart you were already Madame de Hamal."
"Did he?" she cried with delight. "He noticed that? How charming! I
thought he would be mad with jealousy?"
"Ginevra, have you seriously done with Dr. Bretton? Do you want him to
give you up?"
"Oh! you know he _can't_ do that: but wasn't he mad?"
"Quite mad," I assented; "as mad as a March hare."
"Well, and how _ever_ did you get him home?"
"How _ever_, indeed! Have you no pity on his poor mother and me?
Fancy us holding him tight down in the carriage, and he raving between
us, fit to drive everybody delirious. The very coachman went wrong,
somehow, and we lost our way."
"You don't say so? You are laughing at me. Now, Lucy Snowe--"
"I assure you it is fact--and fact, also, that Dr. Bretton would
_not_ stay in the carriage: he broke from us, and _would_ ride
outside."
"And afterwards?"
"Afterwards--when he _did_ reach home--the scene transcends
description."
"Oh, but describe it--you know it is such fun!"
"Fun for _you_, Miss Fanshawe? but" (with stern gravity) you know
the proverb--'What is sport to one may be death to another.'"
"Go on, there's a darling Timon."
"Conscientiously, I cannot, unless you assure me you have some heart."
"I have--such an immensity, you don't know!"
"Good! In that case, you will be able to conceive Dr. Graham Bretton
rejecting his supper in the first instance--the chicken, the
sweetbread prepared for his refreshment, left on the table untouched.
Then----but it is of no use dwelling at length on the harrowing
details. Suffice it to say, that never, in the most stormy fits and
moments of his infancy, had his mother such work to tuck the sheets
about him as she had that night."
"He wouldn't lie still?"
"He wouldn't lie still: there it was. The sheets might be tucked in,
but the thing was to keep them tucked in."
"And what did he say?"
"Say! Can't you imagine him demanding his divine Ginevra,
anathematizing that demon, de Hamal--raving about golden locks, blue
eyes, white arms, glittering bracelets?"
"No, did he? He saw the bracelet?"
"Saw the bracelet? Yes, as plain as I saw it: and, perhaps, for the
first time, he saw also the brand-mark with which its pressure has
encircled your arm. Ginevra" (rising, and changing my tone), "come, we
will have an end of this. Go away to your practising."
And I opened the door.
"But you have not told me all."
"You had better not wait until I _do_ tell you all. Such extra
communicativeness could give you no pleasure. March!"
"Cross thing!" said she; but she obeyed: and, indeed, the first classe
was my territory, and she could not there legally resist a notice of
quittance from me.
Yet, to speak the truth, never had I been less dissatisfied with her
than I was then. There was pleasure in thinking of the contrast
between the reality and my description--to