more deference, a spicy dash of coquetry, an unveiled
consciousness of capacity. I nodded; she treated me like the great
Mogul; so I became the great Mogul as far as she was concerned.
"I like, monsieur, to take my knitting in my hands, and to sit quietly
down in my chair; circumstances defile past me; I watch their march; so
long as they follow the course I wish, I say nothing, and do nothing; I
don't clap my hands, and cry out 'Bravo! How lucky I am!' to attract
the attention and envy of my neighbours--I am merely passive; but when
events fall out ill--when circumstances become adverse--I watch very
vigilantly; I knit on still, and still I hold my tongue; but every now
and then, monsieur, I just put my toe out--so--and give the rebellious
circumstance a little secret push, without noise, which sends it the way
I wish, and I am successful after all, and nobody has seen my expedient.
So, when teachers or masters become troublesome and inefficient--when,
in short, the interests of the school would suffer from their retaining
their places--I mind my knitting, events progress, circumstances glide
past; I see one which, if pushed ever so little awry, will render
untenable the post I wish to have vacated--the deed is done--the
stumbling-block removed--and no one saw me: I have not made an enemy, I
am rid of an incumbrance."
A moment since, and I thought her alluring; this speech concluded, I
looked on her with distaste. "Just like you," was my cold answer.
"And in this way you have ousted Mdlle. Henri? You wanted her office,
therefore you rendered it intolerable to her?"
"Not at all, monsieur, I was merely anxious about Mdlle. Henri's health;
no, your moral sight is clear and piercing, but there you have failed
to discover the truth. I took--I have always taken a real interest in
Mdlle. Henri's welfare; I did not like her going out in all weathers;
I thought it would be more advantageous for her to obtain a permanent
situation; besides, I considered her now qualified to do something more
than teach sewing. I reasoned with her; left the decision to herself;
she saw the correctness of my views, and adopted them."
"Excellent! and now, mademoiselle, you will have the goodness to give me
her address."
"Her address!" and a sombre and stony change came over the mien of
the directress. "Her address? Ah?--well--I wish I could oblige you,
monsieur, but I cannot, and I will tell you why; whenever I myself asked
her for her address, she always evaded the inquiry. I thought--I may
be wrong--but I THOUGHT her motive for doing so, was a natural, though
mistaken reluctance to introduce me to some, probably, very poor
abode; her means were narrow, her origin obscure; she lives somewhere,
doubtless, in the 'basse ville.'"
"I'll not lose sight of my best pupil yet," said I, "though she were
born of beggars and lodged in a cellar; for the rest, it is absurd to
make a bugbear of her origin to me--I happen to know that she was a
Swiss pastor's daughter, neither more nor less; and, as to her narrow
means, I care nothing for the poverty of her purse so long as her heart
overflows with affluence."
"Your sentiments are perfectly noble, monsieur," said the directress,
affecting to suppress a yawn; her sprightliness was now extinct, her
temporary candour shut up; the little, red-coloured, piratical-looking
pennon of audacity she had allowed to float a minute in the air, was
furled, and the broad, sober-hued flag of dissimulation again hung
low over the citadel. I did not like her thus, so I cut short the
TETE-A-TETE and departed.
CHAPTER XIX.
NOVELISTS should never allow themselves to weary of the study of real
life. If they observed this duty conscientiously, they would give us
fewer pictures chequered with vivid contrasts of light and shade;
they would seldom elevate their heroes and heroines to the heights of
rapture--still seldomer sink them to the depths of despair; for if we
rarely taste the fulness of joy in this life, we yet more rarely savour
the acrid bitterness of hopeless anguish; unless, indeed, we have
plunged like beasts into sensual indulgence, abused, strained,
stimulated, again overstrained, and, at last, destroyed our faculties
for enjoyment; then, truly, we may find ourselves without support,
robbed of hope. Our agony is great, and how can it end? We have broken
the spring of our powers; life must be all suffering--too feeble to
conceive faith--death must be darkness--God, spirits, religion can have
no place in our collapsed minds, where linger only hideous and polluting
recollections of vice; and time brings us on to the brink of the grave,
and dissolution flings us in--a rag eaten through and through with
disease, wrung together with pain, stamped into the churchyard sod by
the inexorable heel of despair.
But the man of regular life and rational mind never despairs. He loses
his property--it is a blow--he staggers a moment; then, his energies,
roused by the smart, are at work to seek a remedy; activity soon
mitigates regret. Sickness affects him; he takes patience--endures what
he cannot cure. Acute pain racks him; his writhing limbs know not where
to find rest; he leans on Hope's anchors. Death takes from him what
he loves; roots up, and tears violently away the stem round which his
affections were twined--a dark, dismal time, a frightful wrench--but
some morning Religion looks into his desolate house with sunrise, and
says, that in another world, another life, he shall meet his kindred
again. She speaks of that world as a place unsullied by sin--of that
life, as an era unembittered by suffering; she mightily strengthens
her consolation by connecting with it two ideas--which mortals cannot
comprehend, but on which they love to repose--Eternity, Immortality; and
the mind of the mourner, being filled with an image, faint yet glorious,
of heavenly hills all light and peace--of a spirit resting there in
bliss--of a day when his spirit shall also alight there, free and
disembodied--of a reunion perfected by love, purified from fear--he
takes courage--goes out to encounter the necessities and discharge the
duties of life; and, though sadness may never lift her burden from his
mind, Hope will enable him to support it.
Well--and what suggested all this? and what is the inference to be drawn
therefrom? What suggested it, is the circumstance of my best pupil--my
treasure--being snatched from my hands, and put away out of my reach;
the inference to be drawn