the herds and
flocks, she puts on her sheep-skin mantle; and, addressing a stranger
who rests half reclined on a bed of rushes near the hearth, bids him
mind the bread till her return.
"Take care, young man," she continues, "that you fasten the door well
after us; and, above all, open to none in our absence; whatever sound
you hear, stir not, and look not out. The night will soon fall; this
forest is most wild and lonely; strange noises are often heard therein
after sunset; wolves haunt these glades, and Danish warriors infest the
country; worse things are talked of; you might chance to hear, as it
were, a child cry, and on opening the door to afford it succour, a greet
black bull, or a shadowy goblin dog, might rush over the threshold;
or, more awful still, if something flapped, as with wings, against the
lattice, and then a raven or a white dove flew in and settled on the
hearth, such a visitor would be a sure sign of misfortune to the house;
therefore, heed my advice, and lift the latchet for nothing."
Her husband calls her away, both depart. The stranger, left alone,
listens awhile to the muffled snow-wind, the remote, swollen sound of
the river, and then he speaks.
"It is Christmas Eve," says he, "I mark the date; here I sit alone on
a rude couch of rushes, sheltered by the thatch of a herdsman's hut;
I, whose inheritance was a kingdom, owe my night's harbourage to a poor
serf; my throne is usurped, my crown presses the brow of an invader; I
have no friends; my troops wander broken in the hills of Wales; reckless
robbers spoil my country; my subjects lie prostrate, their breasts
crushed by the heel of the brutal Dane. Fate! thou hast done thy worst,
and now thou standest before me resting thy hand on thy blunted blade.
Ay; I see thine eye confront mine and demand why I still live, why I
still hope. Pagan demon, I credit not thine omnipotence, and so cannot
succumb to thy power. My God, whose Son, as on this night, took on Him
the form of man, and for man vouchsafed to suffer and bleed, controls
thy hand, and without His behest thou canst not strike a stroke. My God
is sinless, eternal, all-wise--in Him is my trust; and though stripped
and crushed by thee--though naked, desolate, void of resource--I do not
despair, I cannot despair: were the lance of Guthrum now wet with my
blood, I should not despair. I watch, I toil, I hope, I pray; Jehovah,
in his own time, will aid."
I need not continue the quotation; the whole devoir was in the same
strain. There were errors of orthography, there were foreign idioms,
there were some faults of construction, there were verbs irregular
transformed into verbs regular; it was mostly made up, as the above
example shows, of short and somewhat rude sentences, and the style stood
in great need of polish and sustained dignity; yet such as it was, I
had hitherto seen nothing like it in the course of my professorial
experience. The girl's mind had conceived a picture of the hut, of the
two peasants, of the crownless king; she had imagined the wintry forest,
she had recalled the old Saxon ghost-legends, she had appreciated
Alfred's courage under calamity, she had remembered his Christian
education, and had shown him, with the rooted confidence of those
primitive days, relying on the scriptural Jehovah for aid against the
mythological Destiny. This she had done without a hint from me: I had
given the subject, but not said a word about the manner of treating it.
"I will find, or make, an opportunity of speaking to her," I said to
myself as I rolled the devoir up; "I will learn what she has of English
in her besides the name of Frances Evans; she is no novice in the
language, that is evident, yet she told me she had neither been in
England, nor taken lessons in English, nor lived in English families."
In the course of my next lesson, I made a report of the other devoirs,
dealing out praise and blame in very small retail parcels, according to
my custom, for there was no use in blaming severely, and high encomiums
were rarely merited. I said nothing of Mdlle. Henri's exercise, and,
spectacles on nose, I endeavoured to decipher in her countenance her
sentiments at the omission. I wanted to find out whether in her existed
a consciousness of her own talents. "If she thinks she did a clever
thing in composing that devoir, she will now look mortified," thought
I. Grave as usual, almost sombre, was her face; as usual, her eyes were
fastened on the cahier open before her; there was something, I thought,
of expectation in her attitude, as I concluded a brief review of the
last devoir, and when, casting it from me and rubbing my hands, I bade
them take their grammars, some slight change did pass over her air
and mien, as though she now relinquished a faint prospect of pleasant
excitement; she had been waiting for something to be discussed in which
she had a degree of interest; the discussion was not to come on, so
expectation sank back, shrunk and sad, but attention, promptly filling
up the void, repaired in a moment the transient collapse of feature;
still, I felt, rather than saw, during the whole course of the lesson,
that a hope had been wrenched from her, and that if she did not show
distress, it was because she would not.
At four o'clock, when the bell rang and the room was in immediate
tumult, instead of taking my hat and starting from the estrade, I sat
still a moment. I looked at Frances, she was putting her books into her
cabas; having fastened the button, she raised her head; encountering my
eye, she made a quiet, respectful obeisance, as bidding good afternoon,
and was turning to depart:--
"Come here," said I, lifting my finger at the same time. She hesitated;
she could not hear the words amidst the uproar now pervading both
school-rooms; I repeated the sign; she approached; again she paused
within half a yard of the estrade, and looked shy, and still doubtful
whether she had mistaken my meaning.
"Step up," I said, speaking with decision. It is the only way of dealing
with diffident, easily embarrassed characters, and with some slight
manual