to behold in a person not yet twenty-five.
The Parisienne, on the other hand, was prodigal and profligate (in
disposition, that is: as to action, I do not know). That latter
quality showed its snake-head to me but once, peeping out very
cautiously. A curious kind of reptile it seemed, judging from the
glimpse I got; its novelty whetted my curiosity: if it would have come
out boldly, perhaps I might philosophically have stood my ground, and
coolly surveyed the long thing from forked tongue to scaly tail-tip;
but it merely rustled in the leaves of a bad novel; and, on
encountering a hasty and ill-advised demonstration of wrath, recoiled
and vanished, hissing. She hated me from that day.
This Parisienne was always in debt; her salary being anticipated, not
only in dress, but in perfumes, cosmetics, confectionery, and
condiments. What a cold, callous epicure she was in all things! I see
her now. Thin in face and figure, sallow in complexion, regular in
features, with perfect teeth, lips like a thread, a large, prominent
chin, a well-opened, but frozen eye, of light at once craving and
ingrate. She mortally hated work, and loved what she called pleasure;
being an insipid, heartless, brainless dissipation of time.
Madame Beck knew this woman's character perfectly well. She once
talked to me about her, with an odd mixture of discrimination,
indifference, and antipathy. I asked why she kept her in the
establishment. She answered plainly, "because it suited her interest
to do so;" and pointed out a fact I had already noticed, namely, that
Mademoiselle St. Pierre possessed, in an almost unique degree, the
power of keeping order amongst her undisciplined ranks of scholars. A
certain petrifying influence accompanied and surrounded her: without
passion, noise, or violence, she held them in check as a breezeless
frost-air might still a brawling stream. She was of little use as far
as communication of knowledge went, but for strict surveillance and
maintenance of rules she was invaluable. "Je sais bien qu'elle n'a pas
de principes, ni, peut-etre, de moeurs," admitted Madame frankly; but
added with philosophy, "son maintien en classe est toujours convenable
et rempli meme d'une certaine dignite: c'est tout ce qu'il faut. Ni
les eleves ni les parents ne regardent plus loin; ni, par consequent,
moi non plus."
* * * * *
A strange, frolicsome, noisy little world was this school: great pains
were taken to hide chains with flowers: a subtle essence of Romanism
pervaded every arrangement: large sensual indulgence (so to speak) was
permitted by way of counterpoise to jealous spiritual restraint. Each
mind was being reared in slavery; but, to prevent reflection from
dwelling on this fact, every pretext for physical recreation was
seized and made the most of. There, as elsewhere, the CHURCH strove to
bring up her children robust in body, feeble in soul, fat, ruddy,
hale, joyous, ignorant, unthinking, unquestioning. "Eat, drink, and
live!" she says. "Look after your bodies; leave your souls to me. I
hold their cure--guide their course: I guarantee their final fate." A
bargain, in which every true Catholic deems himself a gainer. Lucifer
just offers the same terms: "All this power will I give thee, and the
glory of it; for that is delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will I
give it. If thou, therefore, wilt worship me, all shall be thine!"
About this time--in the ripest glow of summer--Madame Beck's house
became as merry a place as a school could well be. All day long the
broad folding-doors and the two-leaved casements stood wide open:
settled sunshine seemed naturalized in the atmosphere; clouds were far
off, sailing away beyond sea, resting, no doubt, round islands such as
England--that dear land of mists--but withdrawn wholly from the drier
continent. We lived far more in the garden than under a roof: classes
were held, and meals partaken of, in the "grand berceau." Moreover,
there was a note of holiday preparation, which almost turned freedom
into licence. The autumnal long vacation was but two months distant;
but before that, a great day--an important ceremony--none other than
the fete of Madame--awaited celebration.
The conduct of this fete devolved chiefly on Mademoiselle St. Pierre:
Madame herself being supposed to stand aloof, disinterestedly
unconscious of what might be going forward in her honour. Especially,
she never knew, never in the least suspected, that a subscription was
annually levied on the whole school for the purchase of a handsome
present. The polite tact of the reader will please to leave out of the
account a brief, secret consultation on this point in Madame's own
chamber.
"What will you have this year?" was asked by her Parisian lieutenant.
"Oh, no matter! Let it alone. Let the poor children keep their
francs," And Madame looked benign and modest.
The St. Pierre would here protrude her chin; she knew Madame by heart;
she always called her airs of "bonte"--"des grimaces." She never even
professed to respect them one instant.
"Vite!" she would say coldly. "Name the article. Shall it be jewellery
or porcelain, haberdashery or silver?"
"Eh bien! Deux ou trois cuillers, et autant de fourchettes en argent."
And the result was a handsome case, containing 300 francs worth of
plate.
The programme of the fete-day's proceedings comprised: Presentation of
plate, collation in the garden, dramatic performance (with pupils and
teachers for actors), a dance and supper. Very gorgeous seemed the
effect of the whole to me, as I well remember. Zelie St. Pierre
understood these things and managed them ably.
The play was the main point; a month's previous drilling being there
required. The choice, too, of the actors required knowledge and care;
then came lessons in elocution, in attitude, and then the fatigue of
countless rehearsals. For all this, as may well be supposed, St.
Pierre did not suffice: other management, other accomplishments than
hers were requisite here. They were supplied in the person of a
master--M. Paul Emanuel, professor of literature. It was never my
lot to be present at the histrionic lessons of M. Paul, but I often
saw him as he crossed the _carre_ (a square hall between the
dwelling-house and school-house). I heard him, too, in the warm
evenings, lecturing with open doors, and his name, with anecdotes of
him, resounded in ones ears from all sides. Especially our former
acquaintance, Miss Ginevra Fanshawe,--who had been selected to take a
prominent part in the play--used, in bestowing upon me a large portion
of her leisure, to lard her discourse with frequent allusions to his
sayings and doings. She esteemed him hideously plain, and used to
profess herself