frightened almost into hysterics at the sound of his
step or voice. A dark little man he certainly was; pungent and
austere. Even to me he seemed a harsh apparition, with his close-
shorn, black head, his broad, sallow brow, his thin cheek, his wide
and quivering nostril, his thorough glance, and hurried bearing.
Irritable he was; one heard that, as he apostrophized with vehemence
the awkward squad under his orders. Sometimes he would break out on
these raw amateur actresses with a passion of impatience at their
falseness of conception, their coldness of emotion, their feebleness
of delivery. "Ecoutez!" he would cry; and then his voice rang through
the premises like a trumpet; and when, mimicking it, came the small
pipe of a Ginevra, a Mathilde, or a Blanche, one understood why a
hollow groan of scorn, or a fierce hiss of rage, rewarded the tame
echo.
"Vous n'etes donc que des poupees," I heard him thunder. "Vous n'avez
pas de passions--vous autres. Vous ne sentez donc rien? Votre chair
est de neige, votre sang de glace! Moi, je veux que tout cela
s'allume, qu'il ait une vie, une ame!"
Vain resolve! And when he at last found it _was_ vain, he
suddenly broke the whole business down. Hitherto he had been teaching
them a grand tragedy; he tore the tragedy in morsels, and came next
day with a compact little comic trifle. To this they took more kindly;
he presently knocked it all into their smooth round pates.
Mademoiselle St. Pierre always presided at M. Emanuel's lessons, and I
was told that the polish of her manner, her seeming attention, her
tact and grace, impressed that gentleman very favourably. She had,
indeed, the art of pleasing, for a given time, whom she would; but the
feeling would not last: in an hour it was dried like dew, vanished
like gossamer.
The day preceding Madame's fete was as much a holiday as the fete
itself. It was devoted to clearing out, cleaning, arranging and
decorating the three schoolrooms. All within-doors was the gayest
bustle; neither up-stairs nor down could a quiet, isolated person find
rest for the sole of her foot; accordingly, for my part, I took refuge
in the garden. The whole day did I wander or sit there alone, finding
warmth in the sun, shelter among the trees, and a sort of
companionship in my own thoughts. I well remember that I exchanged but
two sentences that day with any living being: not that I felt
solitary; I was glad to be quiet. For a looker-on, it sufficed to pass
through the rooms once or twice, observe what changes were being
wrought, how a green-room and a dressing-room were being contrived, a
little stage with scenery erected, how M. Paul Emanuel, in conjunction
with Mademoiselle St. Pierre, was directing all, and how an eager band
of pupils, amongst them Ginevra Fanshawe, were working gaily under his
control.
The great day arrived. The sun rose hot and unclouded, and hot and
unclouded it burned on till evening. All the doors and all the windows
were set open, which gave a pleasant sense of summer freedom--and
freedom the most complete seemed indeed the order of the day. Teachers
and pupils descended to breakfast in dressing-gowns and curl-papers:
anticipating "avec delices" the toilette of the evening, they seemed
to take a pleasure in indulging that forenoon in a luxury of
slovenliness; like aldermen fasting in preparation for a feast. About
nine o'clock A.M., an important functionary, the "coiffeur," arrived.
Sacrilegious to state, he fixed his head-quarters in the oratory, and
there, in presence of _benitier_, candle, and crucifix, solemnised
the mysteries of his art. Each girl was summoned in turn to pass
through his hands; emerging from them with head as smooth as a
shell, intersected by faultless white lines, and wreathed about with
Grecian plaits that shone as if lacquered. I took my turn with the
rest, and could hardly believe what the glass said when I applied to
it for information afterwards; the lavished garlandry of woven brown
hair amazed me--I feared it was not all my own, and it required
several convincing pulls to give assurance to the contrary. I then
acknowledged in the coiffeur a first-rate artist--one who certainly
made the most of indifferent materials.
The oratory closed, the dormitory became the scene of ablutions,
arrayings and bedizenings curiously elaborate. To me it was, and ever
must be an enigma, how they contrived to spend so much time in doing
so little. The operation seemed close, intricate, prolonged: the
result simple. A clear white muslin dress, a blue sash (the Virgin's
colours), a pair of white, or straw-colour kid gloves--such was the
gala uniform, to the assumption whereof that houseful of teachers and
pupils devoted three mortal hours. But though simple, it must be
allowed the array was perfect--perfect in fashion, fit, and freshness;
every head being also dressed with exquisite nicety, and a certain
compact taste--suiting the full, firm comeliness of Labassecourien
contours, though too stiff for any more flowing and flexible style of
beauty--the general effect was, on the whole, commendable.
In beholding this diaphanous and snowy mass, I well remember feeling
myself to be a mere shadowy spot on a field of light; the courage was
not in me to put on a transparent white dress: something thin I must
wear--the weather and rooms being too hot to give substantial fabrics
sufferance, so I had sought through a dozen shops till I lit upon a
crape-like material of purple-gray--the colour, in short, of dun mist,
lying on a moor in bloom. My _tailleuse_ had kindly made it as
well as she could: because, as she judiciously observed, it was "si
triste--si pen voyant," care in the fashion was the more imperative:
it was well she took this view of the matter, for I, had no flower, no
jewel to relieve it: and, what was more, I had no natural rose of
complexion.
We become oblivious of these deficiencies in the uniform routine of
daily drudgery, but they _will_ force upon us their unwelcome
blank on those bright occasions when beauty should shine.
However, in this same gown of shadow, I felt at home and at ease; an
advantage I should not have enjoyed in anything more brilliant or
striking. Madame Beck, too, kept me in countenance; her dress was
almost as quiet as mine, except that she wore a bracelet, and a large
brooch bright with gold and fine stones. We chanced to meet on the
stairs, and she gave me a