then she had so many reasons,
so many explanations; and, after all, she succeeded in proving herself
quite disinterested and even liberal. At last she concluded, she could
say no more, because, as I acquiesced in all things, there was no
further ground for the exercise of her parts of speech. I was obliged to
rise. I would rather have sat a little longer; what had I to return to
but my small empty room? And my eyes had a pleasure in looking at
Mdlle. Reuter, especially now, when the twilight softened her features a
little, and, in the doubtful dusk, I could fancy her forehead as open
as it was really elevated, her mouth touched with turns of sweetness
as well as defined in lines of sense. When I rose to go, I held out
my hand, on purpose, though I knew it was contrary to the etiquette of
foreign habits; she smiled, and said--
"Ah! c'est comme tous les Anglais," but gave me her hand very kindly.
"It is the privilege of my country, Mademoiselle," said I; "and,
remember, I shall always claim it."
She laughed a little, quite good-naturedly, and with the sort of
tranquillity obvious in all she did--a tranquillity which soothed and
suited me singularly, at least I thought so that evening. Brussels
seemed a very pleasant place to me when I got out again into the street,
and it appeared as if some cheerful, eventful, upward-tending career
were even then opening to me, on that selfsame mild, still April night.
So impressionable a being is man, or at least such a man as I was in
those days.
CHAPTER X.
NEXT day the morning hours seemed to pass very slowly at M. Pelet's; I
wanted the afternoon to come that I might go again to the neighbouring
pensionnat and give my first lesson within its pleasant precincts; for
pleasant they appeared to me. At noon the hour of recreation arrived; at
one o'clock we had lunch; this got on the time, and at last St. Gudule's
deep bell, tolling slowly two, marked the moment for which I had been
waiting.
At the foot of the narrow back-stairs that descended from my room, I met
M. Pelet.
"Comme vous avez l'air rayonnant!" said he. "Je ne vous ai jamais vu
aussi gai. Que s'est-il donc passe?"
"Apparemment que j'aime les changements," replied I.
"Ah! je comprends--c'est cela-soyez sage seulement. Vous etes bien
jeune--trop jeune pour le role que vous allez jouer; il faut prendre
garde--savez-vous?"
"Mais quel danger y a-t-il?"
"Je n'en sais rien--ne vous laissez pas aller a de vives
impressions--voila tout."
I laughed: a sentiment of exquisite pleasure played over my nerves at
the thought that "vives impressions" were likely to be created; it was
the deadness, the sameness of life's daily ongoings that had hitherto
been my bane; my blouse-clad "eleves" in the boys' seminary never
stirred in me any "vives impressions" except it might be occasionally
some of anger. I broke from M. Pelet, and as I strode down the passage
he followed me with one of his laughs--a very French, rakish, mocking
sound.
Again I stood at the neighbouring door, and soon was re-admitted into
the cheerful passage with its clear dove-colour imitation marble walls.
I followed the portress, and descending a step, and making a turn, I
found myself in a sort of corridor; a side-door opened, Mdlle. Reuter's
little figure, as graceful as it was plump, appeared. I could now see
her dress in full daylight; a neat, simple mousseline-laine gown fitted
her compact round shape to perfection--delicate little collar and
manchettes of lace, trim Parisian brodequins showed her neck, wrists,
and feet, to complete advantage; but how grave was her face as she
came suddenly upon me! Solicitude and business were in her eye--on her
forehead; she looked almost stern. Her "Bon jour, monsieur," was quite
polite, but so orderly, so commonplace, it spread directly a cool, damp
towel over my "vives impressions." The servant turned back when her
mistress appeared, and I walked slowly along the corridor, side by side
with Mdlle. Reuter.
"Monsieur will give a lesson in the first class to-day," said she;
"dictation or reading will perhaps be the best thing to begin with, for
those are the easiest forms of communicating instruction in a foreign
language; and, at the first, a master naturally feels a little
unsettled."
She was quite right, as I had found from experience; it only remained
for me to acquiesce. We proceeded now in silence. The corridor
terminated in a hall, large, lofty, and square; a glass door on one side
showed within a long narrow refectory, with tables, an armoire, and
two lamps; it was empty; large glass doors, in front, opened on the
playground and garden; a broad staircase ascended spirally on the
opposite side; the remaining wall showed a pair of great folding-doors,
now closed, and admitting: doubtless, to the classes.
Mdlle. Reuter turned her eye laterally on me, to ascertain, probably,
whether I was collected enough to be ushered into her sanctum sanctorum.
I suppose she judged me to be in a tolerable state of self-government,
for she opened the door, and I followed her through. A rustling sound of
uprising greeted our entrance; without looking to the right or left, I
walked straight up the lane between two sets of benches and desks,
and took possession of the empty chair and isolated desk raised on an
estrade, of one step high, so as to command one division; the other
division being under the surveillance of a maitresse similarly elevated.
At the back of the estrade, and attached to a moveable partition
dividing this schoolroom from another beyond, was a large tableau of
wood painted black and varnished; a thick crayon of white chalk lay on
my desk for the convenience of elucidating any grammatical or verbal
obscurity which might occur in my lessons by writing it upon the
tableau; a wet sponge appeared beside the chalk, to enable me to efface
the marks when they had served the purpose intended.
I carefully and deliberately made these observations before allowing
myself to take one glance at the benches before me; having handled the
crayon, looked back at the tableau, fingered the sponge in order to
ascertain that it was in a right state of moisture, I found myself cool
enough to admit of looking calmly up and gazing deliberately round me.
And first I observed that Mdlle. Reuter had already glided away, she
was nowhere visible; a maitresse or teacher, the one who occupied the
corresponding