the most venial of faults. "J'ai
menti plusieurs fois," formed an item of every girl's and woman's
monthly confession: the priest heard unshocked, and absolved
unreluctant. If they had missed going to mass, or read a chapter of a
novel, that was another thing: these were crimes whereof rebuke and
penance were the unfailing weed.
While yet but half-conscious of this state of things, and unlearned in
its results, I got on in my new sphere very well. After the first few
difficult lessons, given amidst peril and on the edge of a moral
volcano that rumbled under my feet and sent sparks and hot fumes into
my eyes, the eruptive spirit seemed to subside, as far as I was
concerned. My mind was a good deal bent on success: I could not bear
the thought of being baffled by mere undisciplined disaffection and
wanton indocility, in this first attempt to get on in life. Many hours
of the night I used to lie awake, thinking what plan I had best adopt
to get a reliable hold on these mutineers, to bring this stiff-necked
tribe under permanent influence. In, the first place, I saw plainly
that aid in no shape was to be expected from Madame: her righteous
plan was to maintain an unbroken popularity with the pupils, at any
and every cost of justice or comfort to the teachers. For a teacher to
seek her alliance in any crisis of insubordination was equivalent to
securing her own expulsion. In intercourse with her pupils, Madame
only took to herself what was pleasant, amiable, and recommendatory;
rigidly requiring of her lieutenants sufficiency for every annoying
crisis, where to act with adequate promptitude was to be unpopular.
Thus, I must look only to myself.
Imprimis--it was clear as the day that this swinish multitude were not
to be driven by force. They were to be humoured, borne with very
patiently: a courteous though sedate manner impressed them; a very
rare flash of raillery did good. Severe or continuous mental
application they could not, or would not, bear: heavy demand on the
memory, the reason, the attention, they rejected point-blank. Where an
English girl of not more than average capacity and docility would
quietly take a theme and bind herself to the task of comprehension and
mastery, a Labassecourienne would laugh in your face, and throw it
back to you with the phrase,--"Dieu, que c'est difficile! Je n'en veux
pas. Cela m'ennuie trop."
A teacher who understood her business would take it back at once,
without hesitation, contest, or expostulation--proceed with even
exaggerated care to smoothe every difficulty, to reduce it to the
level of their understandings, return it to them thus modified, and
lay on the lash of sarcasm with unsparing hand. They would feel the
sting, perhaps wince a little under it; but they bore no malice
against this sort of attack, provided the sneer was not _sour_,
but _hearty_, and that it held well up to them, in a clear,
light, and bold type, so that she who ran might read, their
incapacity, ignorance, and sloth. They would riot for three additional
lines to a lesson; but I never knew them rebel against a wound given
to their self-respect: the little they had of that quality was trained
to be crushed, and it rather liked the pressure of a firm heel than
otherwise.
By degrees, as I acquired fluency and freedom in their language, and
could make such application of its more nervous idioms as suited their
case, the elder and more intelligent girls began rather to like me in
their way: I noticed that whenever a pupil had been roused to feel in
her soul the stirring of worthy emulation, or the quickening of honest
shame, from that date she was won. If I could but once make their
(usually large) ears burn under their thick glossy hair, all was
comparatively well. By-and-by bouquets began to be laid on my desk in
the morning; by way of acknowledgment for this little foreign
attention, I used sometimes to walk with a select few during
recreation. In the course of conversation it befel once or twice that
I made an unpremeditated attempt to rectify some of their singularly
distorted notions of principle; especially I expressed my ideas of the
evil and baseness of a lie. In an unguarded moment, I chanced to say
that, of the two errors; I considered falsehood worse than an
occasional lapse in church-attendance. The poor girls were tutored to
report in Catholic ears whatever the Protestant teacher said. An
edifying consequence ensued. Something--an unseen, an indefinite, a
nameless--something stole between myself and these my best pupils: the
bouquets continued to be offered, but conversation thenceforth became
impracticable. As I paced the alleys or sat in the berceau, a girl
never came to my right hand but a teacher, as if by magic, appeared at
my left. Also, wonderful to relate, Madame's shoes of silence brought
her continually to my back, as quick, as noiseless and unexpected, as
some wandering zephyr.
The opinion of my Catholic acquaintance concerning my spiritual
prospects was somewhat naively expressed to me on one occasion. A
pensionnaire, to whom I had rendered some little service, exclaimed
one day as she sat beside me: "Mademoiselle, what a pity you are a
Protestant!"
"Why, Isabelle?"
"Parceque, quand vous serez morte--vous brulerez tout de suite dans
l'Enfer."
"Croyez-vous?"
"Certainement que j'y crois: tout le monde le sait; et d'ailleurs le
pretre me l'a dit."
Isabelle was an odd, blunt little creature. She added, _sotto
voce_: "Pour assurer votre salut la-haut, on ferait bien de vous
bruler toute vive ici-bas."
I laughed, as, indeed, it was impossible to do otherwise.
* * * * *
Has the reader forgotten Miss Ginevra Fanshawe? If so, I must be
allowed to re-introduce that young lady as a thriving pupil of Madame
Beck's; for such she was. On her arrival in the Rue Fossette, two or
three days after my sudden settlement there, she encountered me with
very little surprise. She must have had good blood in her veins, for
never was any duchess more perfectly, radically, unaffectedly
_nonchalante_ than she: a weak, transient amaze was all she knew
of the sensation of wonder. Most of her other faculties seemed to be
in the same flimsy condition: her liking and disliking, her love and
hate, were mere cobweb and gossamer; but she had one thing about her
that seemed strong and durable enough, and that was--her selfishness.
She was not proud; and--_bonne d'enfants_ as I was--she would
forthwith have made of me a