reflex of a brighter world, show us a glimpse of the current
literature of the day, read us passages from some enchanting tale, or
the last witty feuilleton which had awakened laughter in the saloons
of Paris; taking care always to expunge, with the severest hand,
whether from tragedy, melodrama, tale, or essay, whatever passage,
phrase, or word, could be deemed unsuited to an audience of "jeunes
filles." I noticed more than once, that where retrenchment without
substitute would have left unmeaning vacancy, or introduced weakness,
he could, and did, improvise whole paragraphs, no less vigorous than
irreproachable; the dialogue--the description--he engrafted was often
far better than that he pruned away.
Well, on the evening in question, we were sitting silent as nuns in a
"retreat," the pupils studying, the teachers working. I remember my
work; it was a slight matter of fancy, and it rather interested me; it
had a purpose; I was not doing it merely to kill time; I meant it when
finished as a gift; and the occasion of presentation being near, haste
was requisite, and my fingers were busy.
We heard the sharp bell-peal which we all knew; then the rapid step
familiar to each ear: the words "Voila Monsieur!" had scarcely broken
simultaneously from every lip, when the two-leaved door split (as
split it always did for his admission--such a slow word as "open" is
inefficient to describe his movements), and he stood in the midst of
us.
There were two study tables, both long and flanked with benches; over
the centre of each hung a lamp; beneath this lamp, on either side the
table, sat a teacher; the girls were arranged to the right hand and
the left; the eldest and most studious nearest the lamps or tropics;
the idlers and little ones towards the north and south poles.
Monsieur's habit was politely to hand a chair to some teacher,
generally Zelie St. Pierre, the senior mistress; then to take her
vacated seat; and thus avail himself of the full beam of Cancer or
Capricorn, which, owing to his near sight, he needed.
As usual, Zelie rose with alacrity, smiling to the whole extent of her
mouth, and the full display of her upper and under rows of teeth--that
strange smile which passes from ear to ear, and is marked only by a
sharp thin curve, which fails to spread over the countenance, and
neither dimples the cheek nor lights the eye. I suppose Monsieur did
not see her, or he had taken a whim that he would not notice her, for
he was as capricious as women are said to be; then his "lunettes" (he
had got another pair) served him as an excuse for all sorts of little
oversights and shortcomings. Whatever might be his reason, he passed
by Zelie, came to the other side of the table, and before I could
start up to clear the way, whispered, "Ne bougez pas," and established
himself between me and Miss Fanshawe, who always would be my
neighbour, and have her elbow in my side, however often I declared to
her, "Ginevra, I wish you were at Jericho."
It was easy to say, "Ne bougez pas;" but how could I help it? I must
make him room, and I must request the pupils to recede that _I_
might recede. It was very well for Ginevra to be gummed to me,
"keeping herself warm," as she said, on the winter evenings, and
harassing my very heart with her fidgetings and pokings, obliging me,
indeed, sometimes to put an artful pin in my girdle by way of
protection against her elbow; but I suppose M. Emanuel was not to be
subjected to the same kind of treatment, so I swept away my working
materials, to clear space for his book, and withdrew myself to make
room for his person; not, however, leaving more than a yard of
interval, just what any reasonable man would have regarded as a
convenient, respectful allowance of bench. But M. Emanuel never
_was_ reasonable; flint and tinder that he was! he struck and
took fire directly.
"Vous ne voulez pas de moi pour voisin," he growled: "vous vous donnez
des airs de caste; vous me traitez en paria;" he scowled. "Soit! je
vais arranger la chose!" And he set to work.
"Levez vous toutes, Mesdemoiselles!" cried he.
The girls rose. He made them all file off to the other table. He then
placed me at one extremity of the long bench, and having duly and
carefully brought me my work-basket, silk, scissors, all my
implements, he fixed himself quite at the other end.
At this arrangement, highly absurd as it was, not a soul in the room
dared to laugh; luckless for the giggler would have been the giggle.
As for me, I took it with entire coolness. There I sat, isolated and
cut off from human intercourse; I sat and minded my work, and was
quiet, and not at all unhappy.
"Est ce assez de distance?" he demanded.
"Monsieur en est l'arbitre," said I.
"Vous savez bien que non. C'est vous qui avez cree ce vide immense:
moi je n'y ai pas mis la main."
And with this assertion he commenced the reading.
For his misfortune he had chosen a French translation of what he
called "un drame de Williams Shackspire; le faux dieu," he further
announced, "de ces sots paiens, les Anglais." How far otherwise he
would have characterized him had his temper not been upset, I scarcely
need intimate.
Of course, the translation being French, was very inefficient; nor did
I make any particular effort to conceal the contempt which some of its
forlorn lapses were calculated to excite. Not that it behoved or
beseemed me to say anything: but one can occasionally _look_ the
opinion it is forbidden to embody in words. Monsieur's lunettes being
on the alert, he gleaned up every stray look; I don't think he lost
one: the consequence was, his eyes soon discarded a screen, that their
blaze might sparkle free, and he waxed hotter at the north pole to
which he had voluntarily exiled himself, than, considering the general
temperature of the room, it would have been reasonable to become under
the vertical ray of Cancer itself.
The reading over, it appeared problematic whether he would depart with
his anger unexpressed, or whether he would give it vent. Suppression
was not much in his habits; but still, what had been done to him
definite enough to afford matter for overt reproof? I had not uttered
a sound, and could