you're doomed to become Mrs. William
Crimsworth, I suppose; poor young lady? but you have a spark of spirit;
cherish it, and give the Professor the full benefit thereof."
"Are you married. Mr. Hunsden?" asked Frances, suddenly.
"No. I should have thought you might have guessed I was a Benedict by my
look."
"Well, whenever you marry don't take a wife out of Switzerland; for if
you begin blaspheming Helvetia, and cursing the cantons--above all, if
you mention the word ASS in the same breath with the name Tell (for
ass IS baudet, I know; though Monsieur is pleased to translate
it ESPRIT-FORT) your mountain maid will some night smother her
Breton-bretonnant, even as your own Shakspeare's Othello smothered
Desdemona."
"I am warned," said Hunsden; "and so are you, lad," (nodding to me). "I
hope yet to hear of a travesty of the Moor and his gentle lady, in which
the parts shall be reversed according to the plan just sketched--you,
however, being in my nightcap. Farewell, mademoiselle!" He bowed on her
hand, absolutely like Sir Charles Grandison on that of Harriet Byron;
adding--"Death from such fingers would not be without charms."
"Mon Dieu!" murmured Frances, opening her large eyes and lifting her
distinctly arched brows; "c'est qu'il fait des compliments! je ne m'y
suis pas attendu." She smiled, half in ire, half in mirth, curtsied with
foreign grace, and so they parted.
No sooner had we got into the street than Hunsden collared me.
"And that is your lace-mender?" said he; "and you reckon you have done
a fine, magnanimous thing in offering to marry her? You, a scion of
Seacombe, have proved your disdain of social distinctions by taking up
with an ouvriere! And I pitied the fellow, thinking his feelings had
misled him, and that he had hurt himself by contracting a low match!"
"Just let go my collar, Hunsden."
"On the contrary, he swayed me to and fro; so I grappled him round the
waist. It was dark; the street lonely and lampless. We had then a
tug for it; and after we had both rolled on the pavement, and with
difficulty picked ourselves up, we agreed to walk on more soberly.
"Yes, that's my lace-mender," said I; "and she is to be mine for
life--God willing."
"God is not willing--you can't suppose it; what business have you to
be suited so well with a partner? And she treats you with a sort of
respect, too, and says, 'Monsieur' and modulates her tone in addressing
you, actually, as if you were something superior! She could not evince
more deference to such a one as I, were she favoured by fortune to the
supreme extent of being my choice instead of yours."
"Hunsden, you're a puppy. But you've only seen the title-page of my
happiness; you don't know the tale that follows; you cannot conceive the
interest and sweet variety and thrilling excitement of the narrative."
Hunsden--speaking low and deep, for we had now entered a busier
street--desired me to hold my peace, threatening to do something
dreadful if I stimulated his wrath further by boasting. I laughed till
my sides ached. We soon reached his hotel; before he entered it, he
said--
"Don't be vainglorious. Your lace-mender is too good for you, but not
good enough for me; neither physically nor morally does she come up
to my ideal of a woman. No; I dream of something far beyond that
pale-faced, excitable little Helvetian (by-the-by she has infinitely
more of the nervous, mobile Parisienne in her than of the the robust
'jungfrau'). Your Mdlle. Henri is in person "chetive", in mind "sans
caractere", compared with the queen of my visions. You, indeed, may put
up with that "minois chiffone"; but when I marry I must have straighter
and more harmonious features, to say nothing of a nobler and better
developed shape than that perverse, ill-thriven child can boast."
"Bribe a seraph to fetch you a coal of fire from heaven, if you will,"
said I, "and with it kindle life in the tallest, fattest, most boneless,
fullest-blooded of Ruben's painted women--leave me only my Alpine peri,
and I'll not envy you."
With a simultaneous movement, each turned his back on the other. Neither
said "God bless you;" yet on the morrow the sea was to roll between us.
CHAPTER XXV.
IN two months more Frances had fulfilled the time of mourning for her
aunt. One January morning--the first of the new year holidays--I went in
a fiacre, accompanied only by M. Vandenhuten, to the Rue Notre Dame aux
Neiges, and having alighted alone and walked upstairs, I found Frances
apparently waiting for me, dressed in a style scarcely appropriate to
that cold, bright, frosty day. Never till now had I seen her attired in
any other than black or sad-coloured stuff; and there she stood by the
window, clad all in white, and white of a most diaphanous texture; her
array was very simple, to be sure, but it looked imposing and festal
because it was so clear, full, and floating; a veil shadowed her head,
and hung below her knee; a little wreath of pink flowers fastened it
to her thickly tressed Grecian plait, and thence it fell softly on each
side of her face. Singular to state, she was, or had been crying; when
I asked her if she were ready, she said "Yes, monsieur," with something
very like a checked sob; and when I took a shawl, which lay on the
table, and folded it round her, not only did tear after tear course
unbidden down her cheek, but she shook to my ministration like a reed.
I said I was sorry to see her in such low spirits, and requested to
be allowed an insight into the origin thereof. She only said, "It was
impossible to help it," and then voluntarily, though hurriedly, putting
her hand into mine, accompanied me out of the room, and ran downstairs
with a quick, uncertain step, like one who was eager to get some
formidable piece of business over. I put her into the fiacre. M.
Vandenhuten received her, and seated her beside himself; we drove all
together to the Protestant chapel, went through a certain service in the
Common Prayer Book, and she and I came out married. M. Vandenhuten had
given the bride away.
We took no bridal trip; our modesty, screened by the peaceful obscurity
of our station, and the pleasant isolation of our circumstances, did not
exact that additional precaution. We repaired at once to a small house
I