me
more than I could swallow.
"A la bonne heure," he cried, when I signified that I really could
take no more, and, with uplifted hands, implored to be spared the
additional roll on which he had just spread butter. "You will set me
down as a species of tyrant and Bluebeard, starving women in a garret;
whereas, after all, I am no such thing. Now, Mademoiselle, do you feel
courage and strength to appear?"
I said, I thought I did; though, in truth, I was perfectly confused,
and could hardly tell how I felt: but this little man was of the order
of beings who must not be opposed, unless you possessed an all-dominant
force sufficient to crush him at once.
"Come then," said he, offering his hand.
I gave him mine, and he set off with a rapid walk, which obliged me to
run at his side in order to keep pace. In the carre he stopped a
moment: it was lit with large lamps; the wide doors of the classes
were open, and so were the equally wide garden-doors; orange-trees in
tubs, and tall flowers in pots, ornamented these portals on each side;
groups of ladies and gentlemen in evening-dress stood and walked
amongst the flowers. Within, the long vista of the school-rooms
presented a thronging, undulating, murmuring, waving, streaming
multitude, all rose, and blue, and half translucent white. There were
lustres burning overhead; far off there was a stage, a solemn green
curtain, a row of footlights.
"Nest-ce pas que c'est beau?" demanded my companion.
I should have said it was, but my heart got up into my throat. M. Paul
discovered this, and gave me a side-scowl and a little shake for my
pains.
"I will do my best, but I wish it was over," said I; then I asked:
"Are we to walk through that crowd?"
"By no means: I manage matters better: we pass through the garden--
here."
In an instant we were out of doors: the cool, calm night revived me
somewhat. It was moonless, but the reflex from the many glowing
windows lit the court brightly, and even the alleys--dimly. Heaven was
cloudless, and grand with the quiver of its living fires. How soft are
the nights of the Continent! How bland, balmy, safe! No sea-fog; no
chilling damp: mistless as noon, and fresh as morning.
Having crossed court and garden, we reached the glass door of the
first classe. It stood open, like all other doors that night; we
passed, and then I was ushered into a small cabinet, dividing the
first classe from the grand salle. This cabinet dazzled me, it was so
full of light: it deafened me, it was clamorous with voices: it
stifled me, it was so hot, choking, thronged.
"De l'ordre! Du silence!" cried M. Paul. "Is this chaos?", he
demanded; and there was a hush. With a dozen words, and as many
gestures, he turned out half the persons present, and obliged the
remnant to fall into rank. Those left were all in costume: they were
the performers, and this was the green-room. M. Paul introduced me.
All stared and some tittered. It was a surprise: they had not expected
the Englishwoman would play in a _vaudeville_. Ginevra Fanshawe,
beautifully dressed for her part, and looking fascinatingly pretty,
turned on me a pair of eyes as round as beads. In the highest spirit,
unperturbed by fear or bashfulness, delighted indeed at the thought of
shining off before hundreds--my entrance seemed to transfix her with
amazement in the midst of her joy. She would have exclaimed, but M.
Paul held her and all the rest in check.
Having surveyed and criticized the whole troop, he turned to me.
"You, too, must be dressed for your part."
"Dressed--dressed like a man!" exclaimed Zelie St. Pierre, darting
forwards; adding with officiousness, "I will dress her myself."
To be dressed like a man did not please, and would not suit me. I had
consented to take a man's name and part; as to his dress--_halte
la!_ No. I would keep my own dress, come what might. M. Paul might
storm, might rage: I would keep my own dress. I said so, with a voice
as resolute in intent, as it was low, and perhaps unsteady in
utterance.
He did not immediately storm or rage, as I fully thought he would he
stood silent. But Zelie again interposed.
"She will make a capital _petit-maitre_. Here are the garments,
all--all complete: somewhat too large, but--I will arrange all that.
Come, chere amie--belle Anglaise!"
And she sneered, for I was not "belle." She seized my hand, she was
drawing me away. M. Paul stood impassable--neutral.
"You must not resist," pursued St. Pierre--for resist I did. "You will
spoil all, destroy the mirth of the piece, the enjoyment of the
company, sacrifice everything to your _amour-propre_. This would
be too bad--monsieur will never permit this?"
She sought his eye. I watched, likewise, for a glance. He gave her
one, and then he gave me one. "Stop!" he said slowly, arresting St.
Pierre, who continued her efforts to drag me after her. Everybody
awaited the decision. He was not angry, not irritated; I perceived
that, and took heart.
"You do not like these clothes?" he asked, pointing to the masculine
vestments.
"I don't object to some of them, but I won't have them all."
"How must it be, then? How accept a man's part, and go on the stage
dressed as a woman? This is an amateur affair, it is true--a
_vaudeville de pensionnat;_ certain modifications I might
sanction, yet something you must have to announce you as of the nobler
sex."
"And I will, Monsieur; but it must be arranged in my own way: nobody
must meddle; the things must not be forced upon me. Just let me dress
myself."
Monsieur, without another word, took the costume from St. Pierre, gave
it to me, and permitted me to pass into the dressing-room. Once alone,
I grew calm, and collectedly went to work. Retaining my woman's garb
without the slightest retrenchment, I merely assumed, in addition, a
little vest, a collar, and cravat, and a paletot of small dimensions;
the whole being the costume of a brother of one of the pupils. Having
loosened my hair out of its braids, made up the long back-hair close,
and brushed the front hair to one side, I took my hat and gloves in my
hand and came out. M. Paul was waiting, and so were the others. He
looked at me. "That may pass in a pensionnat," he