explain
the evil of such habits, and show the results which must thence ensue.
Surveillance must work the whole cure. It failed of course. Desiree
was kept in some measure from the servants, but she teased and
pillaged her mamma instead. Whatever belonging to Madame's work-table
or toilet she could lay her hands on, she stole and hid. Madame saw
all this, but she still pretended not to see: she had not rectitude of
soul to confront the child with her vices. When an article disappeared
whose value rendered restitution necessary, she would profess to think
that Desiree had taken it away in play, and beg her to restore it.
Desiree was not to be so cheated: she had learned to bring falsehood
to the aid of theft, and would deny having touched the brooch, ring,
or scissors. Carrying on the hollow system, the mother would calmly
assume an air of belief, and afterwards ceaselessly watch and dog the
child till she tracked her: to her hiding-places--some hole in the
garden-wall--some chink or cranny in garret or out-house. This done,
Madame would send Desiree out for a walk with her _bonne_, and
profit by her absence to rob the robber. Desiree proved herself the
true daughter of her astute parent, by never suffering either her
countenance or manner to betray the least sign of mortification on
discovering the loss.
The second child, Fifine, was said to be like its dead father.
Certainly, though the mother had given it her healthy frame, her blue
eye and ruddy cheek, not from her was derived its moral being. It was
an honest, gleeful little soul: a passionate, warm-tempered, bustling
creature it was too, and of the sort likely to blunder often into
perils and difficulties. One day it bethought itself to fall from top
to bottom of a steep flight of stone steps; and when Madame, hearing
the noise (she always heard every noise), issued from the salle-a-
manger and picked it up, she said quietly,--"Cet enfant a un os
casse."
At first we hoped this was not the case. It was, however, but too
true: one little plump arm hung powerless.
"Let Meess" (meaning me) "take her," said Madame; "et qu'on aille tout
de suite chercher un fiacre."
In a _fiacre_ she promptly, but with admirable coolness and self-
possession, departed to fetch a surgeon.
It appeared she did not find the family-surgeon at home; but that
mattered not: she sought until she laid her hand on a substitute to
her mind, and brought him back with her. Meantime I had cut the
child's sleeve from its arm, undressed and put it to bed.
We none of us, I suppose (by _we_ I mean the bonne, the cook, the
portress, and myself, all which personages were now gathered in the
small and heated chamber), looked very scrutinizingly at the new
doctor when he came into the room. I, at least, was taken up with
endeavouring to soothe Fifine; whose cries (for she had good lungs)
were appalling to hear. These cries redoubled in intensity as the
stranger approached her bed; when he took her up, "Let alone!" she
cried passionately, in her broken English (for she spoke English as
did the other children). "I will not you: I will Dr. Pillule!"
"And Dr. Pillule is my very good friend," was the answer, in perfect
English; "but he is busy at a place three leagues off, and I am come
in his stead. So now, when we get a little calmer, we must commence
business; and we will soon have that unlucky little arm bandaged and
in right order."
Hereupon he called for a glass of _eau sucree_, fed her with some
teaspoonfuls of the sweet liquid (Fifine was a frank gourmande;
anybody could win her heart through her palate), promised her more
when the operation should be over, and promptly went to work. Some
assistance being needed, he demanded it of the cook, a robust, strong-
armed woman; but she, the portress, and the nurse instantly fled. I
did not like to touch that small, tortured limb, but thinking there
was no alternative, my hand was already extended to do what was
requisite. I was anticipated; Madame Beck had put out her own hand:
hers was steady while mine trembled.
"Ca vaudra mieux," said the doctor, turning from me to her.
He showed wisdom in his choice. Mine would have been feigned stoicism,
forced fortitude. Hers was neither forced nor feigned.
"Merci, Madame; tres bien, fort bien!" said the operator when he had
finished. "Voila un sang-froid bien opportun, et qui vaut mille elans
de sensibilite deplacee."
He was pleased with her firmness, she with his compliment. It was
likely, too, that his whole general appearance, his voice, mien, and
manner, wrought impressions in his favour. Indeed, when you looked
well at him, and when a lamp was brought in--for it was evening and
now waxing dusk--you saw that, unless Madame Beck had been less than
woman, it could not well be otherwise. This young doctor (he
_was_ young) had no common aspect. His stature looked imposingly
tall in that little chamber, and amidst that group of Dutch-made
women; his profile was clear, fine and expressive: perhaps his eye
glanced from face to face rather too vividly, too quickly, and too
often; but it had a most pleasant character, and so had his mouth; his
chin was full, cleft, Grecian, and perfect. As to his smile, one could
not in a hurry make up one's mind as to the descriptive epithet it
merited; there was something in it that pleased, but something too
that brought surging up into the mind all one's foibles and weak
points: all that could lay one open to a laugh. Yet Fifine liked this
doubtful smile, and thought the owner genial: much as he had hurt her,
she held out her hand to bid him a friendly good-night. He patted the
little hand kindly, and then he and Madame went down-stairs together;
she talking in her highest tide of spirits and volubility, he
listening with an air of good-natured amenity, dashed with that
unconscious roguish archness I find it difficult to describe.
I noticed that though he spoke French well, he spoke English better;
he had, too, an English complexion, eyes, and form. I noticed more. As
he passed me in leaving the room, turning his face in my direction one
moment--not to address me, but to speak to Madame, yet so standing,
that I almost necessarily looked up at him--a recollection which had
been