John, and
then she raised a glass to examine his mother; a minute or two
afterwards she laughingly whispered her neighbour; upon the
performance commencing, her rambling attention was attracted to the
platform.
On the concert I need not dwell; the reader would not care to have my
impressions thereanent: and, indeed, it would not be worth while to
record them, as they were the impressions of an ignorance crasse. The
young ladies of the Conservatoire, being very much frightened, made
rather a tremulous exhibition on the two grand pianos. M. Josef
Emanuel stood by them while they played; but he had not the tact or
influence of his kinsman, who, under similar circumstances, would
certainly have _compelled_ pupils of his to demean themselves
with heroism and self-possession. M. Paul would have placed the
hysteric debutantes between two fires--terror of the audience, and
terror of himself--and would have inspired them with the courage of
desperation, by making the latter terror incomparably the greater: M.
Josef could not do this.
Following the white muslin pianistes, came a fine, full-grown, sulky
lady in white satin. She sang. Her singing just affected me like the
tricks of a conjuror: I wondered how she did it--how she made her
voice run up and down, and cut such marvellous capers; but a simple
Scotch melody, played by a rude street minstrel, has often moved me
more deeply.
Afterwards stepped forth a gentleman, who, bending his body a good
deal in the direction of the King and Queen, and frequently
approaching his white-gloved hand to the region of his heart, vented a
bitter outcry against a certain "fausse Isabelle." I thought he seemed
especially to solicit the Queen's sympathy; but, unless I am
egregiously mistaken, her Majesty lent her attention rather with the
calm of courtesy than the earnestness of interest. This gentleman's
state of mind was very harrowing, and I was glad when he wound up his
musical exposition of the same.
Some rousing choruses struck me as the best part of the evening's
entertainment. There were present deputies from all the best
provincial choral societies; genuine, barrel-shaped, native
Labassecouriens. These worthies gave voice without mincing the matter
their hearty exertions had at least this good result--the ear drank
thence a satisfying sense of power.
Through the whole performance--timid instrumental duets, conceited
vocal solos, sonorous, brass-lunged choruses--my attention gave but
one eye and one ear to the stage, the other being permanently retained
in the service of Dr. Bretton: I could not forget him, nor cease to
question how he was feeling, what he was thinking, whether he was
amused or the contrary. At last he spoke.
"And how do you like it all, Lucy? You are very quiet," he said, in
his own cheerful tone.
"I am quiet," I said, "because I am so very, _very_ much
interested: not merely with the music, but with everything about me."
He then proceeded to make some further remarks, with so much
equanimity and composure that I began to think he had really not seen
what I had seen, and I whispered--"Miss Fanshawe is here: have you
noticed her?"
"Oh, yes! and I observed that you noticed her too?"
"Is she come with Mrs. Cholmondeley, do you think?"
"Mrs. Cholmondeley is there with a very grand party. Yes; Ginevra was
in _her_ train; and Mrs. Cholmondeley was in Lady ----'s train,
who was in the Queen's train. If this were not one of the compact
little minor European courts, whose very formalities are little more
imposing than familiarities, and whose gala grandeur is but homeliness
in Sunday array, it would sound all very fine."
"Ginevra saw you, I think?"
"So do I think so. I have had my eye on her several times since you
withdrew yours; and I have had the honour of witnessing a little
spectacle which you were spared."
I did not ask what; I waited voluntary information, which was
presently given.
"Miss Fanshawe," he said, "has a companion with her--a lady of rank. I
happen to know Lady Sara by sight; her noble mother has called me in
professionally. She is a proud girl, but not in the least insolent,
and I doubt whether Ginevra will have gained ground in her estimation
by making a butt of her neighbours."
"What neighbours?"
"Merely myself and my mother. As to me it is all very natural:
nothing, I suppose, can be fairer game than the young bourgeois
doctor; but my mother! I never saw her ridiculed before. Do you know,
the curling lip, and sarcastically levelled glass thus directed, gave
me a most curious sensation?"
"Think nothing of it, Dr. John: it is not worth while. If Ginevra were
in a giddy mood, as she is eminently to-night, she would make no
scruple of laughing at that mild, pensive Queen, or that melancholy
King. She is not actuated by malevolence, but sheer, heedless folly.
To a feather-brained school-girl nothing is sacred."
"But you forget: I have not been accustomed to look on Miss Fanshawe
in the light of a feather-brained school-girl. Was she not my
divinity--the angel of my career?"
"Hem! There was your mistake."
"To speak the honest truth, without any false rant or assumed romance,
there actually was a moment, six months ago, when I thought her
divine. Do you remember our conversation about the presents? I was not
quite open with you in discussing that subject: the warmth with which
you took it up amused me. By way of having the full benefit of your
lights, I allowed you to think me more in the dark than I really was.
It was that test of the presents which first proved Ginevra mortal.
Still her beauty retained its fascination: three days--three hours
ago, I was very much her slave. As she passed me to-night, triumphant
in beauty, my emotions did her homage; but for one luckless sneer, I
should yet be the humblest of her servants. She might have scoffed at
_me_, and, while wounding, she would not soon have alienated me:
through myself, she could not in ten years have done what, in a
moment, she has done through my mother."
He held his peace awhile. Never before had I seen so much fire, and so
little sunshine in Dr. John's blue eye as just now.
"Lucy," he recommenced, "look well at my mother, and say, without fear
or favour, in what light she now appears to you."
"As she always does--an English, middle-class gentlewoman; well,
though gravely dressed, habitually independent of pretence,
constitutionally composed and cheerful."
"So she seems to me--bless her! The merry may laugh _with_ mamma,
but the