its hiding-place the
last lurking thought of the heart, and discerned under florid veilings
the bare; barren places of the spirit: yes, and its perverted
tendencies, and its hidden false curves--all that men and women would
not have known--the twisted spine, the malformed limb that was born
with them, and far worse, the stain or disfigurement they have perhaps
brought on themselves. No calamity so accursed but M. Emanuel could
pity and forgive, if it were acknowledged candidly; but where his
questioning eyes met dishonest denial--where his ruthless researches
found deceitful concealment--oh, then, he could be cruel, and I
thought wicked! he would exultantly snatch the screen from poor
shrinking wretches, passionately hurry them to the summit of the mount
of exposure, and there show them all naked, all false--poor living
lies--the spawn of that horrid Truth which cannot be looked on
unveiled. He thought he did justice; for my part I doubt whether man
has a right to do such justice on man: more than once in these his
visitations, I have felt compelled to give tears to his victims, and
not spared ire and keen reproach to himself. He deserved it; but it
was difficult to shake him in his firm conviction that the work was
righteous and needed.
Breakfast being over and mass attended, the school-bell rang and the
rooms filled: a very pretty spectacle was presented in classe. Pupils
and teachers sat neatly arrayed, orderly and expectant, each bearing
in her hand the bouquet of felicitation--the prettiest spring-flowers
all fresh, and filling the air with their fragrance: I only had no
bouquet. I like to see flowers growing, but when they are gathered,
they cease to please. I look on them as things rootless and
perishable; their likeness to life makes me sad. I never offer flowers
to those I love; I never wish to receive them from hands dear to me.
Mademoiselle St. Pierre marked my empty hands--she could not believe I
had been so remiss; with avidity her eye roved over and round me:
surely I must have some solitary symbolic flower somewhere: some small
knot of violets, something to win myself praise for taste,
commendation for ingenuity. The unimaginative "Anglaise" proved better
than the Parisienne's fears: she sat literally unprovided, as bare of
bloom or leaf as the winter tree. This ascertained, Zelie smiled, well
pleased.
"How wisely you have acted to keep your money, Miss Lucie," she said:
"silly I have gone and thrown away two francs on a bouquet of hot-
house flowers!"
And she showed with pride her splendid nosegay.
But hush! a step: _the_ step. It came prompt, as usual, but with
a promptitude, we felt disposed to flatter ourselves, inspired by
other feelings than mere excitability of nerve and vehemence of
intent. We thought our Professor's "foot-fall" (to speak romantically)
had in it a friendly promise this morning; and so it had.
He entered in a mood which made him as good as a new sunbeam to the
already well-lit first classe. The morning light playing amongst our
plants and laughing on our walls, caught an added lustre from M.
Paul's all-benignant salute. Like a true Frenchman (though I don't
know why I should say so, for he was of strain neither French nor
Labassecourien), he had dressed for the "situation" and the occasion.
Not by the vague folds, sinister and conspirator-like, of his soot-
dark paletot were the outlines of his person obscured; on the
contrary, his figure (such as it was, I don't boast of it) was well
set off by a civilized coat and a silken vest quite pretty to behold.
The defiant and pagan bonnet-grec had vanished: bare-headed, he came
upon us, carrying a Christian hat in his gloved hand. The little man
looked well, very well; there was a clearness of amity in his blue
eye, and a glow of good feeling on his dark complexion, which passed
perfectly in the place of beauty: one really did not care to observe
that his nose, though far from small, was of no particular shape, his
cheek thin, his brow marked and square, his mouth no rose-bud: one
accepted him as he was, and felt his presence the reverse of damping
or insignificant.
He passed to his desk; he placed on the same his hat and gloves. "Bon
jour, mes amies," said he, in a tone that somehow made amends to some
amongst us for many a sharp snap and savage snarl: not a jocund, good-
fellow tone, still less an unctuous priestly, accent, but a voice he
had belonging to himself--a voice used when his heart passed the words
to his lips. That same heart did speak sometimes; though an irritable,
it was not an ossified organ: in its core was a place, tender beyond a
man's tenderness; a place that humbled him to little children, that
bound him to girls and women to whom, rebel as he would, he could not
disown his affinity, nor quite deny that, on the whole, he was better
with them than with his own sex.
"We all wish Monsieur a good day, and present to him our
congratulations on the anniversary of his fete," said Mademoiselle
Zelie, constituting herself spokeswoman of the assembly; and advancing
with no more twists of affectation than were with her indispensable to
the achievement of motion, she laid her costly bouquet before him. He
bowed over it.
The long train of offerings followed: all the pupils, sweeping past
with the gliding step foreigners practise, left their tributes as they
went by. Each girl so dexterously adjusted her separate gift, that
when the last bouquet was laid on the desk, it formed the apex to a
blooming pyramid--a pyramid blooming, spreading, and towering with
such exuberance as, in the end, to eclipse the hero behind it. This
ceremony over, seats were resumed, and we sat in dead silence,
expectant of a speech.
I suppose five minutes might have elapsed, and the hush remained
unbroken; ten--and there was no sound.
Many present began, doubtless, to wonder for what Monsieur waited; as
well they might. Voiceless and viewless, stirless and wordless, he
kept his station behind the pile of flowers.
At last there issued forth a voice, rather deep, as if it spoke out of
a hollow:--
"Est-ce la tout?"
Mademoiselle Zelie looked round.
"You have all presented your bouquets?" inquired she of the pupils.
Yes; they had all given their nosegays, from the eldest to the
youngest, from the tallest to the most diminutive. The senior mistress
signified as much.
"Est-ce la tout?" was reiterated in an