having made by it sufficient to pay off some
incumbrances by which the family heritage was burdened. I say he abides
here, but I do not think he is resident above five months out of the
twelve; he wanders from land to land, and spends some part of each
winter in town: he frequently brings visitors with him when he comes to
----shire, and these visitors are often foreigners; sometimes he has
a German metaphysician, sometimes a French savant; he had once a
dissatisfied and savage-looking Italian, who neither sang nor played,
and of whom Frances affirmed that he had "tout l'air d'un conspirateur."
What English guests Hunsden invites, are all either men of Birmingham or
Manchester--hard men, seemingly knit up in one thought, whose talk is
of free trade. The foreign visitors, too, are politicians; they take a
wider theme--European progress--the spread of liberal sentiments over
the Continent; on their mental tablets, the names of Russia, Austria,
and the Pope, are inscribed in red ink. I have heard some of them talk
vigorous sense--yea, I have been present at polyglot discussions in the
old, oak-lined dining-room at Hunsden Wood, where a singular insight
was given of the sentiments entertained by resolute minds respecting old
northern despotisms, and old southern superstitions: also, I have heard
much twaddle, enounced chiefly in French and Deutsch, but let that pass.
Hunsden himself tolerated the drivelling theorists; with the practical
men he seemed leagued hand and heart.
When Hunsden is staying alone at the Wood (which seldom happens) he
generally finds his way two or three times a week to Daisy Lane. He has
a philanthropic motive for coming to smoke his cigar in our porch on
summer evenings; he says he does it to kill the earwigs amongst the
roses, with which insects, but for his benevolent fumigations, he
intimates we should certainly be overrun. On wet days, too, we are
almost sure to see him; according to him, it gets on time to work
me into lunacy by treading on my mental corns, or to force from Mrs.
Crimsworth revelations of the dragon within her, by insulting the memory
of Hofer and Tell.
We also go frequently to Hunsden Wood, and both I and Frances relish a
visit there highly. If there are other guests, their characters are
an interesting study; their conversation is exciting and strange; the
absence of all local narrowness both in the host and his chosen society
gives a metropolitan, almost a cosmopolitan freedom and largeness to the
talk. Hunsden himself is a polite man in his own house: he has, when he
chooses to employ it, an inexhaustible power of entertaining guests; his
very mansion too is interesting, the rooms look storied, the
passages legendary, the low-ceiled chambers, with their long rows of
diamond-paned lattices, have an old-world, haunted air: in his travels
he has collected stores of articles of VERTU, which are well and
tastefully disposed in his panelled or tapestried rooms: I have seen
there one or two pictures, and one or two pieces of statuary which many
an aristocratic connoisseur might have envied.
When I and Frances have dined and spent an evening with Hunsden, he
often walks home with us. His wood is large, and some of the timber
is old and of huge growth. There are winding ways in it which, pursued
through glade and brake, make the walk back to Daisy Lane a somewhat
long one. Many a time, when we have had the benefit of a full moon,
and when the night has been mild and balmy, when, moreover, a certain
nightingale has been singing, and a certain stream, hid in alders, has
lent the song a soft accompaniment, the remote church-bell of the one
hamlet in a district of ten miles, has tolled midnight ere the lord of
the wood left us at our porch. Free-flowing was his talk at such hours,
and far more quiet and gentle than in the day-time and before numbers.
He would then forget politics and discussion, and would dwell on the
past times of his house, on his family history, on himself and his own
feelings--subjects each and all invested with a peculiar zest, for they
were each and all unique. One glorious night in June, after I had been
taunting him about his ideal bride and asking him when she would
come and graft her foreign beauty on the old Hunsden oak, he answered
suddenly--
"You call her ideal; but see, here is her shadow; and there cannot be a
shadow without a substance."
He had led us from the depth of the "winding way" into a glade from
whence the beeches withdrew, leaving it open to the sky; an unclouded
moon poured her light into this glade, and Hunsden held out under her
beam an ivory miniature.
Frances, with eagerness, examined it first; then she gave it to
me--still, however, pushing her little face close to mine, and seeking
in my eyes what I thought of the portrait. I thought it represented a
very handsome and very individual-looking female face, with, as he had
once said, "straight and harmonious features." It was dark; the hair,
raven-black, swept not only from the brow, but from the temples--seemed
thrust away carelessly, as if such beauty dispensed with, nay,
despised arrangement. The Italian eye looked straight into you, and an
independent, determined eye it was; the mouth was as firm as fine; the
chin ditto. On the back of the miniature was gilded "Lucia."
"That is a real head," was my conclusion.
Hunsden smiled.
"I think so," he replied. "All was real in Lucia."
"And she was somebody you would have liked to marry--but could not?"
"I should certainly have liked to marry her, and that I HAVE not done so
is a proof that I COULD not."
He repossessed himself of the miniature, now again in Frances' hand, and
put it away.
"What do YOU think of it?" he asked of my wife, as he buttoned his coat
over it.
"I am sure Lucia once wore chains and broke them," was the strange
answer. "I do not mean matrimonial chains," she added, correcting
herself, as if she feared mis-interpretation, "but social chains of some
sort. The face is that of one who has made an effort, and a successful
and triumphant effort, to wrest some vigorous and valued faculty from
insupportable constraint; and when Lucia's faculty got free, I am
certain it spread wide pinions and carried her higher than--" she
hesitated.
"Than what?" demanded Hunsden.
"Than 'les convenances' permitted you to