the first classe and
the grand salle. One night, by the way, he fell out of this tree, tore
down some of the branches, nearly broke his own neck, and after all,
in running away, got a terrible fright, and was nearly caught by two
people, Madame Beck and M. Emanuel, he thinks, walking in the alley.
From the grande salle the ascent is not difficult to the highest block
of building, finishing in the great garret. The skylight, you know,
is, day and night, left half open for air; by the skylight he entered.
Nearly a year ago I chanced to tell him our legend of the nun; that
suggested his romantic idea of the spectral disguise, which I think
you must allow he has very cleverly carried out.
"But for the nun's black gown and white veil, he would have been
caught again and again both by you and that tiger-Jesuit, M. Paul. He
thinks you both capital ghost-seers, and very brave. What I wonder at
is, rather your secretiveness than your courage. How could you endure
the visitations of that long spectre, time after time, without crying
out, telling everybody, and rousing the whole house and neighbourhood?
"Oh, and how did you like the nun as a bed-fellow? _I_ dressed
her up: didn't I do it well? Did you shriek when you saw her: I should
have gone mad; but then you have such nerves!--real iron and bend-
leather! I believe you feel nothing. You haven't the same
sensitiveness that a person of my constitution has. You seem to me
insensible both to pain and fear and grief. You are a real old
Diogenes.
"Well, dear grandmother! and are you not mightily angry at my
moonlight flitting and run away match? I assure you it is excellent
fun, and I did it partly to spite that minx, Paulina, and that bear,
Dr. John: to show them that, with all their airs, I could get married
as well as they. M. de Bassompierre was at first in a strange fume
with Alfred; he threatened a prosecution for 'detournement de mineur,'
and I know not what; he was so abominably in earnest, that I found
myself forced to do a little bit of the melodramatic--go down on my
knees, sob, cry, drench three pocket-handkerchiefs. Of course, 'mon
oncle' soon gave in; indeed, where was the use of making a fuss? I am
married, and that's all about it. He still says our marriage is not
legal, because I am not of age, forsooth! As if that made any
difference! I am just as much married as if I were a hundred. However,
we are to be married again, and I am to have a trousseau, and Mrs.
Cholmondeley is going to superintend it; and there are some hopes that
M. de Bassompierre will give me a decent portion, which will be very
convenient, as dear Alfred has nothing but his nobility, native and
hereditary, and his pay. I only wish uncle would do things
unconditionally, in a generous, gentleman-like fashion; he is so
disagreeable as to make the dowry depend on Alfred's giving his
written promise that he will never touch cards or dice from the day it
is paid down. They accuse my angel of a tendency to play: I don't know
anything about that, but I _do_ know he is a dear, adorable
creature.
"I cannot sufficiently extol the genius with which de Hamal managed
our flight. How clever in him to select the night of the fete, when
Madame (for he knows her habits), as he said, would infallibly be
absent at the concert in the park. I suppose _you_ must have gone
with her. I watched you rise and leave the dormitory about eleven
o'clock. How you returned alone, and on foot, I cannot conjecture.
That surely was _you_ we met in the narrow old Rue St. Jean? Did
you see me wave my handkerchief from the carriage window?
"Adieu! Rejoice in my good luck: congratulate me on my supreme
happiness, and believe me, dear cynic and misanthrope, yours, in the
best of health and spirits,
GINEVRA LAURA DE HAMAL, nee FANSHAWE.
"P.S.--Remember, I am a countess now. Papa, mamma, and the girls at
home, will be delighted to hear that. 'My daughter the Countess!' 'My
sister the Countess!' Bravo! Sounds rather better than Mrs. John
Bretton, hein?"
* * * * *
In winding up Mistress Fanshawe's memoirs, the reader will no doubt
expect to hear that she came finally to bitter expiation of her
youthful levities. Of course, a large share of suffering lies in
reserve for her future.
A few words will embody my farther knowledge respecting her.
I saw her towards the close of her honeymoon. She called on Madame
Beck, and sent for me into the salon. She rushed into my arms
laughing. She looked very blooming and beautiful: her curls were
longer, her cheeks rosier than ever: her white bonnet and her Flanders
veil, her orange-flowers and her bride's dress, became her mightily.
"I have got my portion!" she cried at once; (Ginevra ever stuck to the
substantial; I always thought there was a good trading element in her
composition, much as she scorned the "bourgeoise;") "and uncle de
Bassompierre is quite reconciled. I don't mind his calling Alfred a
'nincompoop'--that's only his coarse Scotch breeding; and I believe
Paulina envies me, and Dr. John is wild with jealousy--fit to blow his
brains out--and I'm so happy! I really think I've hardly anything left
to wish for--unless it be a carriage and an hotel, and, oh! I--must
introduce you to 'mon mari.' Alfred, come here!"
And Alfred appeared from the inner salon, where he was talking to
Madame Beck, receiving the blended felicitations and reprimands of
that lady. I was presented under my various names: the Dragon,
Diogenes, and Timon. The young Colonel was very polite. He made me a
prettily-turned, neatly-worded apology, about the ghost-visits, &c.,
concluding with saying that "the best excuse for all his iniquities
stood there!" pointing to his bride.
And then the bride sent him back to Madame Beck, and she took me to
herself, and proceeded literally to suffocate me with her unrestrained
spirits, her girlish, giddy, wild nonsense. She showed her ring
exultingly; she called herself Madame la Comtesse de Hamal, and asked
how it sounded, a score of times. I said very little. I gave her only
the crust and rind of my nature. No matter she expected of me nothing
better--she knew me too well to look