hesitation as was rendered inevitable by the difficulty she
experienced in improvising the translation of her thoughts from French
to English.
"England is something unique, as I have heard and read; my idea of it is
vague, and I want to go there to render my idea clear, definite."
"Hum! How much of England do you suppose you could see if you went there
in the capacity of a teacher? A strange notion you must have of getting
a clear and definite idea of a country! All you could see of Great
Britain would be the interior of a school, or at most of one or two
private dwellings."
"It would be an English school; they would be English dwellings."
"Indisputably; but what then? What would be the value of observations
made on a scale so narrow?"
"Monsieur, might not one learn something by analogy?
An-echantillon--a--a sample often serves to give an idea of the whole;
besides, narrow and wide are words comparative, are they not? All my
life would perhaps seem narrow in your eyes--all the life of a--that
little animal subterranean--une taupe--comment dit-on?"
"Mole."
"Yes--a mole, which lives underground would seem narrow even to me."
"Well, mademoiselle--what then? Proceed."
"Mais, monsieur, vous me comprenez."
"Not in the least; have the goodness to explain."
"Why, monsieur, it is just so. In Switzerland I have done but little,
learnt but little, and seen but little; my life there was in a circle;
I walked the same round every day; I could not get out of it; had I
rested--remained there even till my death, I should never have enlarged
it, because I am poor and not skilful, I have not great acquirements;
when I was quite tired of this round, I begged my aunt to go to
Brussels; my existence is no larger here, because I am no richer or
higher; I walk in as narrow a limit, but the scene is changed; it would
change again if I went to England. I knew something of the bourgeois of
Geneva, now I know something of the bourgeois of Brussels; if I went to
London, I would know something of the bourgeois of London. Can you make
any sense out of what I say, monsieur, or is it all obscure?"
"I see, I see--now let us advert to another subject; you propose to
devote your life to teaching, and you are a most unsuccessful teacher;
you cannot keep your pupils in order."
A flush of painful confusion was the result of this harsh remark; she
bent her head to the desk, but soon raising it replied--
"Monsieur, I am not a skilful teacher, it is true, but practice
improves; besides, I work under difficulties; here I only teach sewing,
I can show no power in sewing, no superiority--it is a subordinate
art; then I have no associates in this house, I am isolated; I am too a
heretic, which deprives me of influence."
"And in England you would be a foreigner; that too would deprive you
of influence, and would effectually separate you from all round you; in
England you would have as few connections, as little importance as you
have here."
"But I should be learning something; for the rest, there are probably
difficulties for such as I everywhere, and if I must contend, and
perhaps: be conquered, I would rather submit to English pride than to
Flemish coarseness; besides, monsieur--"
She stopped--not evidently from any difficulty in finding words to
express herself, but because discretion seemed to say, "You have said
enough."
"Finish your phrase," I urged.
"Besides, monsieur, I long to live once more among Protestants; they are
more honest than Catholics; a Romish school is a building with porous
walls, a hollow floor, a false ceiling; every room in this house,
monsieur, has eyeholes and ear-holes, and what the house is, the
inhabitants are, very treacherous; they all think it lawful to tell
lies; they all call it politeness to profess friendship where they feel
hatred."
"All?" said I; "you mean the pupils--the mere children--inexperienced,
giddy things, who have not learnt to distinguish the difference between
right and wrong?"
"On the contrary, monsieur--the children are the most sincere; they have
not yet had time to become accomplished in duplicity; they will tell
lies, but they do it inartificially, and you know they are lying; but
the grown-up people are very false; they deceive strangers, they deceive
each other--"
A servant here entered:--
"Mdlle. Henri--Mdlle. Reuter vous prie de vouloir bien conduire la
petite de Dorlodot chez elle, elle vous attend dans le cabinet
de Rosalie la portiere--c'est que sa bonne n'est pas venue la
chercher--voyez-vous."
"Eh bien! est-ce que je suis sa bonne--moi?" demanded Mdlle. Henri; then
smiling, with that same bitter, derisive smile I had seen on her lips
once before, she hastily rose and made her exit.
CHAPTER XVIII.
THE young Anglo-Swiss evidently derived both pleasure and profit from
the study of her mother-tongue. In teaching her I did not, of course,
confine myself to the ordinary school routine; I made instruction in
English a channel for instruction in literature. I prescribed to her a
course of reading; she had a little selection of English classics, a
few of which had been left her by her mother, and the others she had
purchased with her own penny-fee. I lent her some more modern works; all
these she read with avidity, giving me, in writing, a clear summary of
each work when she had perused it. Composition, too, she delighted in.
Such occupation seemed the very breath of her nostrils, and soon her
improved productions wrung from me the avowal that those qualities in
her I had termed taste and fancy ought rather to have been denominated
judgment and imagination. When I intimated so much, which I did as usual
in dry and stinted phrase, I looked for the radiant and exulting smile
my one word of eulogy had elicited before; but Frances coloured. If she
did smile, it was very softly and shyly; and instead of looking up to me
with a conquering glance, her eyes rested on my hand, which, stretched
over her shoulder, was writing some directions with a pencil on the
margin of her book.
"Well, are you pleased that I am satisfied with your progress?" I asked.
"Yes," said she slowly, gently, the blush that had half subsided
returning.
"But I do not say enough, I suppose?" I continued. "My praises are too
cool?"
She made no answer, and, I thought, looked a little sad. I divined her
thoughts, and should much have liked to have responded