are the nobody I once
thought you, you must be a cool hand."
"The nobody you once thought me!" I repeated, and my face grew a
little hot; but I would not be angry: of what importance was a school-
girl's crude use of the terms nobody and somebody? I confined myself,
therefore, to the remark that I had merely met with civility; and
asked "what she saw in civility to throw the recipient into a fever of
confusion?"
"One can't help wondering at some things," she persisted.
"Wondering at marvels of your own manufacture. Are you ready at last?"
"Yes; let me take your arm."
"I would rather not: we will walk side by side."
When she took my arm, she always leaned upon me her whole weight; and,
as I was not a gentleman, or her lover, I did not like it.
"There, again!" she cried. "I thought, by offering to take your arm, to
intimate approbation of your dress and general appearance: I meant it
as a compliment."
"You did? You meant, in short, to express that you are not ashamed to
be seen in the street with me? That if Mrs. Cholmondeley should be
fondling her lapdog at some window, or Colonel de Hamal picking his
teeth in a balcony, and should catch a glimpse of us, you would not
quite blush for your companion?"
"Yes," said she, with that directness which was her best point--which
gave an honest plainness to her very fibs when she told them--which
was, in short, the salt, the sole preservative ingredient of a
character otherwise not formed to keep.
I delegated the trouble of commenting on this "yes" to my countenance;
or rather, my under-lip voluntarily anticipated my tongue of course,
reverence and solemnity were not the feelings expressed in the look I
gave her.
"Scornful, sneering creature!" she went on, as we crossed a great
square, and entered the quiet, pleasant park, our nearest way to the
Rue Crecy. "Nobody in this world was ever such a Turk to me as you
are!"
"You bring it on yourself: let me alone: have the sense to be quiet: I
will let you alone."
"As if one _could_ let you alone, when you are so peculiar and so
mysterious!"
"The mystery and peculiarity being entirely the conception of your own
brain--maggots--neither more nor less, be so good as to keep them out
of my sight."
"But _are_ you anybody?" persevered she, pushing her hand, in
spite of me, under my arm; and that arm pressed itself with
inhospitable closeness against my side, by way of keeping out the
intruder.
"Yes," I said, "I am a rising character: once an old lady's companion,
then a nursery-governess, now a school-teacher."
"Do--_do_ tell me who you are? I'll not repeat it," she urged,
adhering with ludicrous tenacity to the wise notion of an incognito
she had got hold of; and she squeezed the arm of which she had now
obtained full possession, and coaxed and conjured till I was obliged
to pause in the park to laugh. Throughout our walk she rang the most
fanciful changes on this theme; proving, by her obstinate credulity,
or incredulity, her incapacity to conceive how any person not
bolstered up by birth or wealth, not supported by some consciousness
of name or connection, could maintain an attitude of reasonable
integrity. As for me, it quite sufficed to my mental tranquillity that
I was known where it imported that known I should be; the rest sat on
me easily: pedigree, social position, and recondite intellectual
acquisition, occupied about the same space and place in my interests
and thoughts; they were my third-class lodgers--to whom could be
assigned only the small sitting-room and the little back bedroom: even
if the dining and drawing-rooms stood empty, I never confessed it to
them, as thinking minor accommodations better suited to their
circumstances. The world, I soon learned, held a different estimate:
and I make no doubt, the world is very right in its view, yet believe
also that I am not quite wrong in mine.
There are people whom a lowered position degrades morally, to whom
loss of connection costs loss of self-respect: are not these justified
in placing the highest value on that station and association which is
their safeguard from debasement? If a man feels that he would become
contemptible in his own eyes were it generally known that his ancestry
were simple and not gentle, poor and not rich, workers and not
capitalists, would it be right severely to blame him for keeping these
fatal facts out of sight--for starting, trembling, quailing at the
chance which threatens exposure? The longer we live, the more out
experience widens; the less prone are we to judge our neighbour's
conduct, to question the world's wisdom: wherever an accumulation of
small defences is found, whether surrounding the prude's virtue or the
man of the world's respectability, there, be sure, it is needed.
We reached the Hotel Crecy; Paulina was ready; Mrs. Bretton was with
her; and, under her escort and that of M. de Bassompierre, we were
soon conducted to the place of assembly, and seated in good seats, at
a convenient distance from the Tribune. The youth of the Athenee were
marshalled before us, the municipality and their bourgmestre were in
places of honour, the young princes, with their tutors, occupied a
conspicuous position, and the body of the building was crowded with
the aristocracy and first burghers of the town.
Concerning the identity of the professor by whom the "discours" was to
be delivered, I had as yet entertained neither care nor question. Some
vague expectation I had that a savant would stand up and deliver a
formal speech, half dogmatism to the Athenians, half flattery to the
princes.
The Tribune was yet empty when we entered, but in ten minutes after it
was filled; suddenly, in a second of time, a head, chest, and arms
grew above the crimson desk. This head I knew: its colour, shape,
port, expression, were familiar both to me and Miss Fanshawe; the
blackness and closeness of cranium, the amplitude and paleness of
brow, the blueness and fire of glance, were details so domesticated in
the memory, and so knit with many a whimsical association, as almost
by this their sudden apparition, to tickle fancy to a laugh. Indeed, I
confess, for my part, I did laugh till I was warm; but then I bent my
head, and made my handkerchief and a lowered veil the sole confidants
of my mirth.
I think I was glad to see M.