then, having extinguished the candle and substituted for it a
night-lamp, she glided through an inner door, which she left ajar--the
entrance to her own chamber, a large, well-furnished apartment; as was
discernible through the aperture.
My devotions that night were all thanksgiving. Strangely had I been
led since morning--unexpectedly had I been provided for. Scarcely
could I believe that not forty-eight hours had elapsed since I left
London, under no other guardianship than that which protects the
passenger-bird--with no prospect but the dubious cloud-tracery of
hope.
I was a light sleeper; in the dead of night I suddenly awoke. All was
hushed, but a white figure stood in the room--Madame in her night-
dress. Moving without perceptible sound, she visited the three
children in the three beds; she approached me: I feigned sleep, and
she studied me long. A small pantomime ensued, curious enough. I
daresay she sat a quarter of an hour on the edge of my bed, gazing at
my face. She then drew nearer, bent close over me; slightly raised my
cap, and turned back the border so as to expose my hair; she looked at
my hand lying on the bedclothes. This done, she turned to the chair
where my clothes lay: it was at the foot of the bed. Hearing her touch
and lift them, I opened my eyes with precaution, for I own I felt
curious to see how far her taste for research would lead her. It led
her a good way: every article did she inspect. I divined her motive
for this proceeding, viz. the wish to form from the garments a
judgment respecting the wearer, her station, means, neatness, &c. The
end was not bad, but the means were hardly fair or justifiable. In my
dress was a pocket; she fairly turned it inside out: she counted the
money in my purse; she opened a little memorandum-book, coolly perused
its contents, and took from between the leaves a small plaited lock of
Miss Marchmont's grey hair. To a bunch of three keys, being those of
my trunk, desk, and work-box, she accorded special attention: with
these, indeed, she withdrew a moment to her own room. I softly rose in
my bed and followed her with my eye: these keys, reader, were not
brought back till they had left on the toilet of the adjoining room
the impress of their wards in wax. All being thus done decently and in
order, my property was returned to its place, my clothes were
carefully refolded. Of what nature were the conclusions deduced from
this scrutiny? Were they favourable or otherwise? Vain question.
Madame's face of stone (for of stone in its present night aspect it
looked: it had been human, and, as I said before, motherly, in the
salon) betrayed no response.
Her duty done--I felt that in her eyes this business was a duty--she
rose, noiseless as a shadow: she moved towards her own chamber; at the
door, she turned, fixing her eye on the heroine of the bottle, who
still slept and loudly snored. Mrs. Svini (I presume this was Mrs.
Svini, Anglice or Hibernice, Sweeny)--Mrs. Sweeny's doom was in Madame
Beck's eye--an immutable purpose that eye spoke: Madame's visitations
for shortcomings might be slow, but they were sure. All this was very
un-English: truly I was in a foreign land.
The morrow made me further acquainted with Mrs. Sweeny. It seems she
had introduced herself to her present employer as an English lady in
reduced circumstances: a native, indeed, of Middlesex, professing to
speak the English tongue with the purest metropolitan accent. Madame--
reliant on her own infallible expedients for finding out the truth in
time--had a singular intrepidity in hiring service off-hand (as indeed
seemed abundantly proved in my own case). She received Mrs. Sweeny as
nursery-governess to her three children. I need hardly explain to the
reader that this lady was in effect a native of Ireland; her station I
do not pretend to fix: she boldly declared that she had "had the
bringing-up of the son and daughter of a marquis." I think myself, she
might possibly have been a hanger-on, nurse, fosterer, or washerwoman,
in some Irish family: she spoke a smothered tongue, curiously overlaid
with mincing cockney inflections. By some means or other she had
acquired, and now held in possession, a wardrobe of rather suspicious
splendour--gowns of stiff and costly silk, fitting her indifferently,
and apparently made for other proportions than those they now adorned;
caps with real lace borders, and--the chief item in the inventory, the
spell by which she struck a certain awe through the household,
quelling the otherwise scornfully disposed teachers and servants, and,
so long as her broad shoulders _wore_ the folds of that majestic
drapery, even influencing Madame herself--_a real Indian shawl_--
"un veritable cachemire," as Madame Beck said, with unmixed reverence
and amaze. I feel quite sure that without this "cachemire" she would
not have kept her footing in the pensionnat for two days: by virtue of
it, and it only, she maintained the same a month.
But when Mrs. Sweeny knew that I was come to fill her shoes, then it
was that she declared herself--then did she rise on Madame Beck in her
full power--then come down on me with her concentrated weight. Madame
bore this revelation and visitation so well, so stoically, that I for
very shame could not support it otherwise than with composure. For one
little moment Madame Beck absented herself from the room; ten minutes
after, an agent of the police stood in the midst of us. Mrs. Sweeny
and her effects were removed. Madame's brow had not been ruffled
during the scene--her lips had not dropped one sharply-accented word.
This brisk little affair of the dismissal was all settled before
breakfast: order to march given, policeman called, mutineer expelled;
"chambre d'enfans" fumigated and cleansed, windows thrown open, and
every trace of the accomplished Mrs. Sweeny--even to the fine essence
and spiritual fragrance which gave token so subtle and so fatal of the
head and front of her offending--was annihilated from the Rue
Fossette: all this, I say, was done between the moment of Madame
Beck's issuing like Aurora from her chamber, and that in which she
coolly sat down to pour out her first cup of coffee.
About noon, I was summoned to dress Madame. (It appeared my place was
to be a hybrid between gouvernante and lady's-maid.) Till noon, she
haunted the house in her wrapping-gown, shawl, and soundless slippers.
How would the lady-chief of an