attentive of any present. She rarely addressed me in class; when
she did it was with an air of marked deference; it was her pleasure, her
joy to make me still the master in all things.
At six o'clock P.M. my daily labours ceased. I then came home, for
my home was my heaven; ever at that hour, as I entered our private
sitting-room, the lady-directress vanished from before my eyes, and
Frances Henri, my own little lace-mender, was magically restored to my
arms; much disappointed she would have been if her master had not been
as constant to the tryste as herself, and if his truthfull kiss had not
been prompt to answer her soft, "Bon soir, monsieur."
Talk French to me she would, and many a punishment she has had for
her wilfulness. I fear the choice of chastisement must have been
injudicious, for instead of correcting the fault, it seemed to encourage
its renewal. Our evenings were our own; that recreation was necessary to
refresh our strength for the due discharge of our duties; sometimes we
spent them all in conversation, and my young Genevese, now that she was
thoroughly accustomed to her English professor, now that she loved
him too absolutely to fear him much, reposed in him a confidence so
unlimited that topics of conversation could no more be wanting with him
than subjects for communion with her own heart. In those moments, happy
as a bird with its mate, she would show me what she had of vivacity, of
mirth, of originality in her well-dowered nature. She would show, too,
some stores of raillery, of "malice," and would vex, tease, pique me
sometimes about what she called my "bizarreries anglaises," my "caprices
insulaires," with a wild and witty wickedness that made a perfect white
demon of her while it lasted. This was rare, however, and the elfish
freak was always short: sometimes when driven a little hard in the war
of words--for her tongue did ample justice to the pith, the point, the
delicacy of her native French, in which language she always attacked
me--I used to turn upon her with my old decision, and arrest bodily the
sprite that teased me. Vain idea! no sooner had I grasped hand or arm
than the elf was gone; the provocative smile quenched in the expressive
brown eyes, and a ray of gentle homage shone under the lids in its
place. I had seized a mere vexing fairy, and found a submissive and
supplicating little mortal woman in my arms. Then I made her get a book,
and read English to me for an hour by way of penance. I frequently dosed
her with Wordsworth in this way, and Wordsworth steadied her soon; she
had a difficulty in comprehending his deep, serene, and sober mind; his
language, too, was not facile to her; she had to ask questions, to sue
for explanations, to be like a child and a novice, and to acknowledge
me as her senior and director. Her instinct instantly penetrated and
possessed the meaning of more ardent and imaginative writers. Byron
excited her; Scott she loved; Wordsworth only she puzzled at, wondered
over, and hesitated to pronounce an opinion upon.
But whether she read to me, or talked with me; whether she teased me
in French, or entreated me in English; whether she jested with wit,
or inquired with deference; narrated with interest, or listened with
attention; whether she smiled at me or on me, always at nine o'clock I
was left abandoned. She would extricate herself from my arms, quit
my side, take her lamp, and be gone. Her mission was upstairs; I have
followed her sometimes and watched her. First she opened the door of the
dortoir (the pupils' chamber), noiselessly she glided up the long room
between the two rows of white beds, surveyed all the sleepers; if any
were wakeful, especially if any were sad, spoke to them and soothed
them; stood some minutes to ascertain that all was safe and tranquil;
trimmed the watch-light which burned in the apartment all night, then
withdrew, closing the door behind her without sound. Thence she glided
to our own chamber; it had a little cabinet within; this she sought;
there, too, appeared a bed, but one, and that a very small one; her face
(the night I followed and observed her) changed as she approached this
tiny couch; from grave it warmed to earnest; she shaded with one hand
the lamp she held in the other; she bent above the pillow and hung
over a child asleep; its slumber (that evening at least, and usually,
I believe) was sound and calm; no tear wet its dark eyelashes; no fever
heated its round cheek; no ill dream discomposed its budding features.
Frances gazed, she did not smile, and yet the deepest delight filled,
flushed her face; feeling pleasurable, powerful, worked in her whole
frame, which still was motionless. I saw, indeed, her heart heave, her
lips were a little apart, her breathing grew somewhat hurried; the child
smiled; then at last the mother smiled too, and said in low soliloquy,
"God bless my little son!" She stooped closer over him, breathed the
softest of kisses on his brow, covered his minute hand with hers, and
at last started up and came away. I regained the parlour before her.
Entering it two minutes later she said quietly as she put down her
extinguished lamp--
"Victor rests well: he smiled in his sleep; he has your smile,
monsieur."
The said Victor was of course her own boy, born in the third year of
our marriage: his Christian name had been given him in honour of M.
Vandenhuten, who continued always our trusty and well-beloved friend.
Frances was then a good and dear wife to me, because I was to her a
good, just, and faithful husband. What she would have been had she
married a harsh, envious, careless man--a profligate, a prodigal,
a drunkard, or a tyrant--is another question, and one which I once
propounded to her. Her answer, given after some reflection, was--
"I should have tried to endure the evil or cure it for awhile; and when
I found it intolerable and incurable, I should have left my torturer
suddenly and silently."
"And if law or might had forced you back again?"
"What, to a drunkard, a profligate, a selfish spendthrift, an unjust
fool?"
"Yes."
"I would have gone back; again assured myself whether or not his vice
and my misery were capable of remedy;