won: my homeless, anchorless, unsupported mind had again
leisure for a brief repose. Till the "Vivid" arrived in harbour, no
further action would be required of me; but then.... Oh! I could not
look forward. Harassed, exhausted, I lay in a half-trance.
The stewardess talked all night; not to me but to the young steward,
her son and her very picture. He passed in and out of the cabin
continually: they disputed, they quarrelled, they made it up again
twenty times in the course of the night. She professed to be writing a
letter home--she said to her father; she read passages of it aloud,
heeding me no more than a stock--perhaps she believed me asleep.
Several of these passages appeared to comprise family secrets, and
bore special reference to one "Charlotte," a younger sister who, from
the bearing of the epistle, seemed to be on the brink of perpetrating
a romantic and imprudent match; loud was the protest of this elder
lady against the distasteful union. The dutiful son laughed his
mother's correspondence to scorn. She defended it, and raved at him.
They were a strange pair. She might be thirty-nine or forty, and was
buxom and blooming as a girl of twenty. Hard, loud, vain and vulgar,
her mind and body alike seemed brazen and imperishable. I should
think, from her childhood, she must have lived in public stations; and
in her youth might very likely have been a barmaid.
Towards morning her discourse ran on a new theme: "the Watsons," a
certain expected family-party of passengers, known to her, it
appeared, and by her much esteemed on account of the handsome profit
realized in their fees. She said, "It was as good as a little fortune
to her whenever this family crossed."
At dawn all were astir, and by sunrise the passengers came on board.
Boisterous was the welcome given by the stewardess to the "Watsons,"
and great was the bustle made in their honour. They were four in
number, two males and two females. Besides them, there was but one
other passenger--a young lady, whom a gentlemanly, though languid-
looking man escorted. The two groups offered a marked contrast. The
Watsons were doubtless rich people, for they had the confidence of
conscious wealth in their bearing; the women--youthful both of them,
and one perfectly handsome, as far as physical beauty went--were
dressed richly, gaily, and absurdly out of character for the
circumstances. Their bonnets with bright flowers, their velvet cloaks
and silk dresses, seemed better suited for park or promenade than for
a damp packet deck. The men were of low stature, plain, fat, and
vulgar; the oldest, plainest, greasiest, broadest, I soon found was
the husband--the bridegroom I suppose, for she was very young--of the
beautiful girl. Deep was my amazement at this discovery; and deeper
still when I perceived that, instead of being desperately wretched in
such a union, she was gay even to giddiness. "Her laughter," I
reflected, "must be the mere frenzy of despair." And even while this
thought was crossing my mind, as I stood leaning quiet and solitary
against the ship's side, she came tripping up to me, an utter
stranger, with a camp-stool in her hand, and smiling a smile of which
the levity puzzled and startled me, though it showed a perfect set of
perfect teeth, she offered me the accommodation of this piece of
furniture. I declined it of course, with all the courtesy I could put
into my manner; she danced off heedless and lightsome. She must have
been good-natured; but what had made her marry that individual, who
was at least as much like an oil-barrel as a man?
The other lady passenger, with the gentleman-companion, was quite a
girl, pretty and fair: her simple print dress, untrimmed straw-bonnet
and large shawl, gracefully worn, formed a costume plain to quakerism:
yet, for her, becoming enough. Before the gentleman quitted her, I
observed him throwing a glance of scrutiny over all the passengers, as
if to ascertain in what company his charge would be left. With a most
dissatisfied air did his eye turn from the ladies with the gay
flowers; he looked at me, and then he spoke to his daughter, niece, or
whatever she was: she also glanced in my direction, and slightly
curled her short, pretty lip. It might be myself, or it might be my
homely mourning habit, that elicited this mark of contempt; more
likely, both. A bell rang; her father (I afterwards knew that it was
her father) kissed her, and returned to land. The packet sailed.
Foreigners say that it is only English girls who can thus be trusted
to travel alone, and deep is their wonder at the daring confidence of
English parents and guardians. As for the "jeunes Meess," by some
their intrepidity is pronounced masculine and "inconvenant," others
regard them as the passive victims of an educational and theological
system which wantonly dispenses with proper "surveillance." Whether
this particular young lady was of the sort that can the most safely be
left unwatched, I do not know: or, rather did not _then_ know;
but it soon appeared that the dignity of solitude was not to her
taste. She paced the deck once or twice backwards and forwards; she
looked with a little sour air of disdain at the flaunting silks and
velvets, and the bears which thereon danced attendance, and eventually
she approached me and spoke.
"Are you fond of a sea-voyage?" was her question.
I explained that my _fondness_ for a sea-voyage had yet to
undergo the test of experience; I had never made one.
"Oh, how charming!" cried she. "I quite envy you the novelty: first
impressions, you know, are so pleasant. Now I have made so many, I
quite forget the first: I am quite _blasee_ about the sea and all
that."
I could not help smiling.
"Why do you laugh at me?" she inquired, with a frank testiness that
pleased me better than her other talk.
"Because you are so young to be _blasee_ about anything."
"I am seventeen" (a little piqued).
"You hardly look sixteen. Do you like travelling alone?"
"Bah! I care nothing about it. I have crossed the Channel ten times,
alone; but then I take care never to be long alone: I always make
friends."
"You will scarcely make many friends this voyage, I think" (glancing
at the Watson-group, who were now laughing and making a great deal of
noise on deck).
"Not of those odious men and women," said she: "such people should be
steerage passengers. Are