be lifted a second, and a blue eye, glancing out
from under the screen, will take its brief, sly, searching survey, and
retreat again."
I smiled, and so did Pelet, and after a few minutes' silence, I asked:
"Will she ever marry, do you think?"
"Marry! Will birds pair? Of course it is both her intention and
resolution to marry when she finds a suitable match, and no one is
better aware than herself of the sort of impression she is capable
of producing; no one likes better to captivate in a quiet way. I am
mistaken if she will not yet leave the print of her stealing steps on
thy heart, Crimsworth."
"Of her steps? Confound it, no! My heart is not a plank to be walked
on."
"But the soft touch of a patte de velours will do it no harm."
"She offers me no patte de velours; she is all form and reserve with
me."
"That to begin with; let respect be the foundation, affection the first
floor, love the superstructure; Mdlle. Reuter is a skilful architect."
"And interest, M. Pelet--interest. Will not mademoiselle consider that
point?"
"Yes, yes, no doubt; it will be the cement between every stone. And now
we have discussed the directress, what of the pupils? N'y-a-t-il pas de
belles etudes parmi ces jeunes tetes?"
"Studies of character? Yes; curious ones, at least, I imagine; but one
cannot divine much from a first interview."
"Ah, you affect discretion; but tell me now, were you not a little
abashed before these blooming young creatures?
"At first, yes; but I rallied and got through with all due sang-froid."
"I don't believe you."
"It is true, notwithstanding. At first I thought them angels, but they
did not leave me long under that delusion; three of the eldest and
handsomest undertook the task of setting me right, and they managed
so cleverly that in five minutes I knew them, at least, for what they
were--three arrant coquettes."
"Je les connais!" exclaimed M. Pelet. "Elles sont toujours au premier
rang a l'eglise et a la promenade; une blonde superbe, une jolie
espiegle, une belle brune."
"Exactly."
"Lovely creatures all of them--heads for artists; what a group they
would make, taken together! Eulalie (I know their names), with her
smooth braided hair and calm ivory brow. Hortense, with her rich chesnut
locks so luxuriantly knotted, plaited, twisted, as if she did not know
how to dispose of all their abundance, with her vermilion lips, damask
cheek, and roguish laughing eye. And Caroline de Blemont! Ah, there is
beauty! beauty in perfection. What a cloud of sable curls about the face
of a houri! What fascinating lips! What glorious black eyes! Your Byron
would have worshipped her, and you--you cold, frigid islander!--you
played the austere, the insensible in the presence of an Aphrodite so
exquisite?"
I might have laughed at the director's enthusiasm had I believed
it real, but there was something in his tone which indicated got-up
raptures. I felt he was only affecting fervour in order to put me off my
guard, to induce me to come out in return, so I scarcely even smiled. He
went on:
"Confess, William, do not the mere good looks of Zoraide Reuter appear
dowdyish and commonplace compared with the splendid charms of some of
her pupils?"
The question discomposed me, but I now felt plainly that my principal
was endeavouring (for reasons best known to himself--at that time I
could not fathom them) to excite ideas and wishes in my mind alien to
what was right and honourable. The iniquity of the instigation proved
its antidote, and when he further added:--
"Each of those three beautiful girls will have a handsome fortune; and
with a little address, a gentlemanlike, intelligent young fellow like
you might make himself master of the hand, heart, and purse of any one
of the trio."
I replied by a look and an interrogative "Monsieur?" which startled him.
He laughed a forced laugh, affirmed that he had only been joking, and
demanded whether I could possibly have thought him in earnest. Just then
the bell rang; the play-hour was over; it was an evening on which M.
Pelet was accustomed to read passages from the drama and the belles
lettres to his pupils. He did not wait for my answer, but rising, left
the room, humming as he went some gay strain of Beranger's.
CHAPTER XII.
DAILY, as I continued my attendance at the seminary of Mdlle. Reuter,
did I find fresh occasions to compare the ideal with the real. What
had I known of female character previously to my arrival at Brussels?
Precious little. And what was my notion of it? Something vague, slight,
gauzy, glittering; now when I came in contact with it I found it to be
a palpable substance enough; very hard too sometimes, and often heavy;
there was metal in it, both lead and iron.
Let the idealists, the dreamers about earthly angel and human flowers,
just look here while I open my portfolio and show them a sketch or
two, pencilled after nature. I took these sketches in the second-class
schoolroom of Mdlle. Reuter's establishment, where about a hundred
specimens of the genus "jeune fille" collected together, offered a
fertile variety of subject. A miscellaneous assortment they were,
differing both in caste and country; as I sat on my estrade and glanced
over the long range of desks, I had under my eye French, English,
Belgians, Austrians, and Prussians. The majority belonged to the class
bourgeois; but there were many countesses, there were the daughters of
two generals and of several colonels, captains, and government EMPLOYES;
these ladies sat side by side with young females destined to be
demoiselles de magasins, and with some Flamandes, genuine aborigines of
the country. In dress all were nearly similar, and in manners there was
small difference; exceptions there were to the general rule, but the
majority gave the tone to the establishment, and that tone was rough,
boisterous, masked by a point-blank disregard of all forbearance towards
each other or their teachers; an eager pursuit by each individual of her
own interest and convenience; and a coarse indifference to the interest
and convenience of every one else. Most of them could lie with audacity
when it appeared advantageous to do so. All understood the art of
speaking fair when a point was to be gained, and could with consummate
skill and at a moment's notice turn the cold shoulder the instant
civility ceased to be profitable. Very little open quarrelling ever took
place amongst them; but backbiting and talebearing