of the Hesperides might be unlike the
sloe in the wild thicket; as the high-couraged but tractable Arabian
is unlike the rude and stubborn "sheltie." He was looking for me, but
had not yet explored the corner where the schoolmaster had just put
me. I remained quiet; yet another minute I would watch.
He approached de Hamal; he paused near him; I thought he had a
pleasure in looking over his head; Dr. Bretton, too, gazed on the
Cleopatra. I doubt if it were to his taste: he did not simper like the
little Count; his mouth looked fastidious, his eye cool; without
demonstration he stepped aside, leaving room for others to approach. I
saw now that he was waiting, and, rising, I joined him.
We took one turn round the gallery; with Graham it was very pleasant
to take such a turn. I always liked dearly to hear what he had to say
about either pictures or books; because without pretending to be a
connoisseur, he always spoke his thought, and that was sure to be
fresh: very often it was also just and pithy. It was pleasant also to
tell him some things he did not know--he listened so kindly, so
teachably; unformalized by scruples lest so to bend his bright
handsome head, to gather a woman's rather obscure and stammering
explanation, should imperil the dignity of his manhood. And when he
communicated information in return, it was with a lucid intelligence
that left all his words clear graven on the memory; no explanation of
his giving, no fact of his narrating, did I ever forget.
As we left the gallery, I asked him what he thought of the Cleopatra
(after making him laugh by telling him how Professor Emanuel had sent
me to the right about, and taking him to see the sweet series of
pictures recommended to my attention.)
"Pooh!" said he. "My mother is a better-looking woman. I heard some
French fops, yonder, designating her as 'le type du voluptueux;' if
so, I can only say, 'le voluptueux' is little to my liking. Compare
that mulatto with Ginevra!"
CHAPTER XX.
THE CONCERT.
One morning, Mrs. Bretton, coming promptly into my room, desired me
to open my drawers and show her my dresses; which I did, without a
word.
"That will do," said she, when she had turned them over. "You must
have a new one."
She went out. She returned presently with a dressmaker. She had me
measured. "I mean," said she, "to follow my own taste, and to have my
own way in this little matter."
Two days after came home--a pink dress!
"That is not for me," I said, hurriedly, feeling that I would almost
as soon clothe myself in the costume of a Chinese lady of rank.
"We shall see whether it is for you or not," rejoined my godmother,
adding with her resistless decision: "Mark my words. You will wear it
this very evening."
I thought I should not; I thought no human force should avail to put
me into it. A pink dress! I knew it not. It knew not me. I had not
proved it.
My godmother went on to decree that I was to go with her and Graham to
a concert that same night: which concert, she explained, was a grand
affair to be held in the large salle, or hall, of the principal
musical society. The most advanced of the pupils of the Conservatoire
were to perform: it was to be followed by a lottery "au benefice des
pauvres;" and to crown all, the King, Queen, and Prince of Labassecour
were to be present. Graham, in sending tickets, had enjoined attention
to costume as a compliment due to royalty: he also recommended
punctual readiness by seven o'clock.
About six, I was ushered upstairs. Without any force at all, I found
myself led and influenced by another's will, unconsulted, unpersuaded,
quietly overruled. In short, the pink dress went on, softened by some
drapery of black lace. I was pronounced to be en grande tenue, and
requested to look in the glass. I did so with some fear and trembling;
with more fear and trembling, I turned away. Seven o'clock struck; Dr.
Bretton was come; my godmother and I went down. _She_ was clad in
brown velvet; as I walked in her shadow, how I envied her those folds
of grave, dark majesty! Graham stood in the drawing-room doorway.
"I _do_ hope he will not think I have been decking myself out to
draw attention," was my uneasy aspiration.
"Here, Lucy, are some flowers," said he, giving me a bouquet. He took
no further notice of my dress than was conveyed in a kind smile and
satisfied nod, which calmed at once my sense of shame and fear of
ridicule. For the rest; the dress was made with extreme simplicity,
guiltless of flounce or furbelow; it was but the light fabric and
bright tint which scared me, and since Graham found in it nothing
absurd, my own eye consented soon to become reconciled.
I suppose people who go every night to places of public amusement, can
hardly enter into the fresh gala feeling with which an opera or a
concert is enjoyed by those for whom it is a rarity: I am not sure
that I expected great pleasure from the concert, having but a very
vague notion of its nature, but I liked the drive there well. The snug
comfort of the close carriage on a cold though fine night, the
pleasure of setting out with companions so cheerful and friendly, the
sight of the stars glinting fitfully through the trees as we rolled
along the avenue; then the freer burst of the night-sky when we issued
forth to the open chaussee, the passage through the city gates, the
lights there burning, the guards there posted, the pretence of
inspection, to which we there submitted, and which amused us so much--
all these small matters had for me, in their novelty, a peculiarly
exhilarating charm. How much of it lay in the atmosphere of friendship
diffused about me, I know not: Dr. John and his mother were both in
their finest mood, contending animatedly with each other the whole
way, and as frankly kind to me as if I had been of their kin.
Our way lay through some of the best streets of Villette, streets
brightly lit, and far more lively now than at high noon. How brilliant
seemed the shops! How glad, gay, and abundant flowed the tide of life
along the