"Whether what he had just said would have the effect of
making me entirely detest him?"
I hardly remember what answer I made, or how it came about; I don't
think I spoke at all, but I know we managed to bid good-night on
friendly terms: and, even after M. Paul had reached the door, he
turned back just to explain, "that he would not be understood to speak
in entire condemnation of the scarlet dress" ("Pink! pink!" I threw
in); "that he had no intention to deny it the merit of _looking_
rather well" (the fact was, M. Emanuel's taste in colours decidedly
leaned to the brilliant); "only he wished to counsel me, whenever, I
wore it, to do so in the same spirit as if its material were 'bure,'
and its hue 'gris de poussiere.'"
"And the flowers under my bonnet, Monsieur?" I asked. "They are very
little ones--?"
"Keep them little, then," said he. "Permit them not to become full-
blown."
"And the bow, Monsieur--the bit of ribbon?"
"Va pour le ruban!" was the propitious answer.
And so we settled it.
* * * * *
"Well done, Lucy Snowe!" cried I to myself; "you have come in for a
pretty lecture--brought on yourself a 'rude savant,' and all through
your wicked fondness for worldly vanities! Who would have thought it?
You deemed yourself a melancholy sober-sides enough! Miss Fanshawe
there regards you as a second Diogenes. M. de Bassompierre, the other
day, politely turned the conversation when it ran on the wild gifts of
the actress Vashti, because, as he kindly said, 'Miss Snowe looked
uncomfortable.' Dr. John Bretton knows you only as 'quiet Lucy'--'a
creature inoffensive as a shadow;' he has said, and you have heard him
say it: 'Lucy's disadvantages spring from over-gravity in tastes and
manner--want of colour in character and costume.' Such are your own
and your friends' impressions; and behold! there starts up a little
man, differing diametrically from all these, roundly charging you with
being too airy and cheery--too volatile and versatile--too flowery and
coloury. This harsh little man--this pitiless censor--gathers up all
your poor scattered sins of vanity, your luckless chiffon of rose-
colour, your small fringe of a wreath, your small scrap of ribbon,
your silly bit of lace, and calls you to account for the lot, and for
each item. You are well habituated to be passed by as a shadow in
Life's sunshine: it its a new thing to see one testily lifting his
hand to screen his eyes, because you tease him with an obtrusive ray."
CHAPTER XXIX.
MONSIEUR'S FETE.
I was up the next morning an hour before daybreak, and finished my
guard, kneeling on the dormitory floor beside the centre stand, for
the benefit of such expiring glimmer as the night-lamp afforded in its
last watch.
All my materials--my whole stock of beads and silk--were used up
before the chain assumed the length and richness I wished; I had
wrought it double, as I knew, by the rule of contraries, that to, suit
the particular taste whose gratification was in view, an effective
appearance was quite indispensable. As a finish to the ornament, a
little gold clasp was needed; fortunately I possessed it in the
fastening of my sole necklace; I duly detached and re-attached it,
then coiled compactly the completed guard; and enclosed it in a small
box I had bought for its brilliancy, made of some tropic shell of the
colour called "nacarat," and decked with a little coronal of sparkling
blue stones. Within the lid of the box, I carefully graved with my
scissors' point certain initials.
* * * * *
The reader will, perhaps, remember the description of Madame Beck's
fete; nor will he have forgotten that at each anniversary, a handsome
present was subscribed for and offered by the school. The observance
of this day was a distinction accorded to none but Madame, and, in a
modified form, to her kinsman and counsellor, M. Emanuel. In the
latter case it was an honour spontaneously awarded, not plotted and
contrived beforehand, and offered an additional proof, amongst many
others, of the estimation in which--despite his partialities,
prejudices, and irritabilities--the professor of literature was held
by his pupils. No article of value was offered to him: he distinctly
gave it to be understood, that he would accept neither plate nor
jewellery. Yet he liked a slight tribute; the cost, the money-value,
did not touch him: a diamond ring, a gold snuff-box, presented, with
pomp, would have pleased him less than a flower, or a drawing, offered
simply and with sincere feelings. Such was his nature. He was a man,
not wise in his generation, yet could he claim a filial sympathy with
"the dayspring on high."
M. Paul's fete fell on the first of March and a Thursday. It proved a
fine sunny day; and being likewise the morning on which it was
customary to attend mass; being also otherwise distinguished by the
half-holiday which permitted the privilege of walking out, shopping,
or paying visits in the afternoon: these combined considerations
induced a general smartness and freshness of dress. Clean collars were
in vogue; the ordinary dingy woollen classe-dress was exchanged for
something lighter and clearer. Mademoiselle Zelie St. Pierre, on this
particular Thursday, even assumed a "robe de soie," deemed in
economical Labassecour an article of hazardous splendour and luxury;
nay, it was remarked that she sent for a "coiffeur" to dress her hair
that morning; there were pupils acute enough to discover that she had
bedewed her handkerchief and her hands with a new and fashionable
perfume. Poor Zelie! It was much her wont to declare about this time,
that she was tired to death of a life of seclusion and labour; that
she longed to have the means and leisure for relaxation; to have some
one to work for her--a husband who would pay her debts (she was
woefully encumbered with debt), supply her wardrobe, and leave her at
liberty, as she said, to "gouter un peu les plaisirs." It had long
been rumoured, that her eye was upon M. Emanuel. Monsieur Emanuel's
eye was certainly often upon her. He would sit and watch her
perseveringly for minutes together. I have seen him give her a
quarter-of-an-hour's gaze, while the class was silently composing,
and he sat throned on his estrade, unoccupied. Conscious always of
this basilisk attention, she would writhe under it, half-flattered,
half-puzzled, and Monsieur would follow her sensations, sometimes
looking appallingly acute; for in some cases, he had the terrible
unerring penetration of instinct, and pierced in