perishing--half lava,
half glow.
I had heard this woman termed "plain," and I expected bony harshness
and grimness--something large, angular, sallow. What I saw was the
shadow of a royal Vashti: a queen, fair as the day once, turned pale
now like twilight, and wasted like wax in flame.
For awhile--a long while--I thought it was only a woman, though an
unique woman, Who moved in might and grace before this multitude. By-
and-by I recognised my mistake. Behold! I found upon her something
neither of woman nor of man: in each of her eyes sat a devil. These
evil forces bore her through the tragedy, kept up her feeble strength
--for she was but a frail creature; and as the action rose and the stir
deepened, how wildly they shook her with their passions of the pit!
They wrote HELL on her straight, haughty brow. They tuned her voice to
the note of torment. They writhed her regal face to a demoniac mask.
Hate and Murder and Madness incarnate she stood.
It was a marvellous sight: a mighty revelation.
It was a spectacle low, horrible, immoral.
Swordsmen thrust through, and dying in their blood on the arena sand;
bulls goring horses disembowelled, made a meeker vision for the
public--a milder condiment for a people's palate--than Vashti torn by
seven devils: devils which cried sore and rent the tenement they
haunted, but still refused to be exorcised.
Suffering had struck that stage empress; and she stood before her
audience neither yielding to, nor enduring, nor, in finite measure,
resenting it: she stood locked in struggle, rigid in resistance. She
stood, not dressed, but draped in pale antique folds, long and regular
like sculpture. A background and entourage and flooring of deepest
crimson threw her out, white like alabaster--like silver: rather, be
it said, like Death.
Where was the artist of the Cleopatra? Let him come and sit down and
study this different vision. Let him seek here the mighty brawn, the
muscle, the abounding blood, the full-fed flesh he worshipped: let all
materialists draw nigh and look on.
I have said that she does not _resent_ her grief. No; the
weakness of that word would make it a lie. To her, what hurts becomes
immediately embodied: she looks on it as a thing that can be attacked,
worried down, torn in shreds. Scarcely a substance herself, she
grapples to conflict with abstractions. Before calamity she is a
tigress; she rends her woes, shivers them in convulsed abhorrence.
Pain, for her, has no result in good: tears water no harvest of
wisdom: on sickness, on death itself, she looks with the eye of a
rebel. Wicked, perhaps, she is, but also she is strong; and her
strength has conquered Beauty, has overcome Grace, and bound both at
her side, captives peerlessly fair, and docile as fair. Even in the
uttermost frenzy of energy is each maenad movement royally,
imperially, incedingly upborne. Her hair, flying loose in revel or
war, is still an angel's hair, and glorious under a halo. Fallen,
insurgent, banished, she remembers the heaven where she rebelled.
Heaven's light, following her exile, pierces its confines, and
discloses their forlorn remoteness.
Place now the Cleopatra, or any other slug, before her as an obstacle,
and see her cut through the pulpy mass as the scimitar of Saladin
clove the down cushion. Let Paul Peter Rubens wake from the dead, let
him rise out of his cerements, and bring into this presence all the
army of his fat women; the magian power or prophet-virtue gifting that
slight rod of Moses, could, at one waft, release and re-mingle a sea
spell-parted, whelming the heavy host with the down-rush of overthrown
sea-ramparts.
Vashti was not good, I was told; and I have said she did not look
good: though a spirit, she was a spirit out of Tophet. Well, if so
much of unholy force can arise from below, may not an equal efflux of
sacred essence descend one day from above?
What thought Dr. Graham of this being?
For long intervals I forgot to look how he demeaned himself, or to
question what he thought. The strong magnetism of genius drew my heart
out of its wonted orbit; the sunflower turned from the south to a
fierce light, not solar--a rushing, red, cometary light--hot on vision
and to sensation. I had seen acting before, but never anything like
this: never anything which astonished Hope and hushed Desire; which
outstripped Impulse and paled Conception; which, instead of merely
irritating imagination with the thought of what _might_ be done,
at the same time fevering the nerves because it was _not_ done,
disclosed power like a deep, swollen winter river, thundering in
cataract, and bearing the soul, like a leaf, on the steep and steelly
sweep of its descent.
Miss Fanshawe, with her usual ripeness of judgment, pronounced Dr.
Bretton a serious, impassioned man, too grave and too impressible. Not
in such light did I ever see him: no such faults could I lay to his
charge. His natural attitude was not the meditative, nor his natural
mood the sentimental; _impressionable_ he was as dimpling water,
but, almost as water, _unimpressible:_ the breeze, the sun, moved
him--metal could not grave, nor fire brand.
Dr. John _could_ think and think well, but he was rather a man of
action than of thought; he _could_ feel, and feel vividly in his
way, but his heart had no chord for enthusiasm: to bright, soft, sweet
influences his eyes and lips gave bright, soft, sweet welcome,
beautiful to see as dyes of rose and silver, pearl and purple, imbuing
summer clouds; for what belonged to storm, what was wild and intense,
dangerous, sudden, and flaming, he had no sympathy, and held with it
no communion. When I took time and regained inclination to glance at
him, it amused and enlightened me to discover that he was watching
that sinister and sovereign Vashti, not with wonder, nor worship, nor
yet dismay, but simply with intense curiosity. Her agony did not pain
him, her wild moan--worse than a shriek--did not much move him; her
fury revolted him somewhat, but not to the point of horror. Cool young
Briton! The pale cliffs of his own England do not look down on the
tides of the Channel more calmly than he watched the Pythian
inspiration of that night.
Looking at his face, I longed to know his exact opinions, and at last
I put a question tending to elicit them. At the sound of my voice he
awoke as if out of a dream;