pronounced. Then
added, not unkindly, "Courage, mon ami! Un peu de sangfroid--un peu
d'aplomb, M. Lucien, et tout ira bien."
St. Pierre sneered again, in her cold snaky manner.
I was irritable, because excited, and I could not help turning upon
her and saying, that if she were not a lady and I a gentleman, I
should feel disposed to call her out.
"After the play, after the play," said M. Paul. "I will then divide my
pair of pistols between you, and we will settle the dispute according
to form: it will only be the old quarrel of France and England."
But now the moment approached for the performance to commence. M.
Paul, setting us before him, harangued us briefly, like a general
addressing soldiers about to charge. I don't know what he said, except
that he recommended each to penetrate herself with a sense of her
personal insignificance. God knows I thought this advice superfluous
for some of us. A bell tinkled. I and two more were ushered on to the
stage. The bell tinkled again. I had to speak the very first words.
"Do not look at the crowd, nor think of it," whispered M. Paul in my
ear. "Imagine yourself in the garret, acting to the rats."
He vanished. The curtain drew up--shrivelled to the ceiling: the
bright lights, the long room, the gay throng, burst upon us. I thought
of the black-beetles, the old boxes, the worm-eaten bureau. I said my
say badly; but I said it. That first speech was the difficulty; it
revealed to me this fact, that it was not the crowd I feared so much
as my own voice. Foreigners and strangers, the crowd were nothing to
me. Nor did I think of them. When my tongue once got free, and my
voice took its true pitch, and found its natural tone, I thought of
nothing but the personage I represented--and of M. Paul, who was
listening, watching, prompting in the side-scenes.
By-and-by, feeling the right power come--the spring demanded gush and
rise inwardly--I became sufficiently composed to notice my fellow-
actors. Some of them played very well; especially Ginevra Fanshawe,
who had to coquette between two suitors, and managed admirably: in
fact she was in her element. I observed that she once or twice threw a
certain marked fondness and pointed partiality into her manner towards
me--the fop. With such emphasis and animation did she favour me, such
glances did she dart out into the listening and applauding crowd, that
to me--who knew her--it presently became evident she was acting
_at_ some one; and I followed her eye, her smile, her gesture,
and ere long discovered that she had at least singled out a handsome
and distinguished aim for her shafts; full in the path of those
arrows--taller than other spectators, and therefore more sure to
receive them--stood, in attitude quiet but intent, a well-known form--
that of Dr. John.
The spectacle seemed somehow suggestive. There was language in Dr.
John's look, though I cannot tell what he said; it animated me: I drew
out of it a history; I put my idea into the part I per formed; I threw
it into my wooing of Ginevra. In the "Ours," or sincere lover, I saw
Dr. John. Did I pity him, as erst? No, I hardened my heart, rivalled
and out-rivalled him. I knew myself but a fop, but where _he_ was
outcast _I_ could please. Now I know acted as if wishful and
resolute to win and conquer. Ginevra seconded me; between us we half-
changed the nature of the _role_, gilding it from top to toe.
Between the acts M. Paul, told us he knew not what possessed us, and
half expostulated. "C'est peut-etre plus beau que votre modele," said
he, "mais ce n'est pas juste." I know not what possessed me either;
but somehow, my longing was to eclipse the "Ours," _i.e._, Dr.
John. Ginevra was tender; how could I be otherwise than chivalric?
Retaining the letter, I recklessly altered the spirit of the
_role_. Without heart, without interest, I could not play it at
all. It must be played--in went the yearned-for seasoning--thus
favoured, I played it with relish.
What I felt that night, and what I did, I no more expected to feel and
do, than to be lifted in a trance to the seventh heaven. Cold,
reluctant, apprehensive, I had accepted a part to please another: ere
long, warming, becoming interested, taking courage, I acted to please
myself. Yet the next day, when I thought it over, I quite disapproved
of these amateur performances; and though glad that I had obliged M.
Paul, and tried my own strength for once, I took a firm resolution,
never to be drawn into a similar affair. A keen relish for dramatic
expression had revealed itself as part of my nature; to cherish and
exercise this new-found faculty might gift me with a world of delight,
but it would not do for a mere looker-on at life: the strength and
longing must be put by; and I put them by, and fastened them in with
the lock of a resolution which neither Time nor Temptation has since
picked.
No sooner was the play over, and _well_ over, than the choleric
and arbitrary M. Paul underwent a metamorphosis. His hour of
managerial responsibility past, he at once laid aside his magisterial
austerity; in a moment he stood amongst us, vivacious, kind, and
social, shook hands with us all round, thanked us separately, and
announced his determination that each of us should in turn be his
partner in the coming ball. On his claiming my promise, I told him I
did not dance. "For once I must," was the answer; and if I had not
slipped aside and kept out of his way, he would have compelled me to
this second performance. But I had acted enough for one evening; it
was time I retired into myself and my ordinary life. My dun-coloured
dress did well enough under a paletot on the stage, but would not suit
a waltz or a quadrille. Withdrawing to a quiet nook, whence unobserved
I could observe--the ball, its splendours and its pleasures, passed
before me as a spectacle.
Again Ginevra Fanshawe was the belle, the fairest and the gayest
present; she was selected to open the ball: very lovely she looked,
very gracefully she danced, very joyously she smiled. Such scenes were
her triumphs--she was the child of pleasure. Work or suffering found
her listless and dejected, powerless and