in thunder. The man who takes such a woman
for his wife, ought to be prepared to guarantee her an existence all
sunshine. Indignant at last with her teasing peevishness, I curtly
requested her "to hold her tongue." The rebuff did her good, and it
was observable that she liked me no worse for it.
As dark night drew on, the sea roughened: larger waves swayed strong
against the vessel's side. It was strange to reflect that blackness
and water were round us, and to feel the ship ploughing straight on
her pathless way, despite noise, billow, and rising gale. Articles of
furniture began to fall about, and it became needful to lash them to
their places; the passengers grew sicker than ever; Miss Fanshawe
declared, with groans, that she must die.
"Not just yet, honey," said the stewardess. "We're just in port."
Accordingly, in another quarter of an hour, a calm fell upon us all;
and about midnight the voyage ended.
I was sorry: yes, I was sorry. My resting-time was past; my
difficulties--my stringent difficulties--recommenced. When I went on
deck, the cold air and black scowl of the night seemed to rebuke me
for my presumption in being where I was: the lights of the foreign
sea-port town, glimmering round the foreign harbour, met me like
unnumbered threatening eyes. Friends came on board to welcome the
Watsons; a whole family of friends surrounded and bore away Miss
Fanshawe; I--but I dared not for one moment dwell on a comparison of
positions.
Yet where should I go? I must go somewhere. Necessity dare not be
nice. As I gave the stewardess her fee--and she seemed surprised at
receiving a coin of more value than, from such a quarter, her coarse
calculations had probably reckoned on--I said, "Be kind enough to
direct me to some quiet, respectable inn, where I can go for the
night."
She not only gave me the required direction, but called a
commissionaire, and bid him take charge of me, and--_not_ my
trunk, for that was gone to the custom-house.
I followed this man along a rudely-paved street, lit now by a fitful
gleam of moonlight; he brought me to the inn. I offered him sixpence,
which he refused to take; supposing it not enough, I changed it for a
shilling; but this also he declined, speaking rather sharply, in a
language to me unknown. A waiter, coming forward into the lamp-lit
inn-passage, reminded me, in broken English, that my money was foreign
money, not current here. I gave him a sovereign to change. This little
matter settled, I asked for a bedroom; supper I could not take: I was
still sea-sick and unnerved, and trembling all over. How deeply glad I
was when the door of a very small chamber at length closed on me and
my exhaustion. Again I might rest: though the cloud of doubt would be
as thick to-morrow as ever; the necessity for exertion more urgent,
the peril (of destitution) nearer, the conflict (for existence) more
severe.
CHAPTER VII.
VILLETTE.
I awoke next morning with courage revived and spirits refreshed:
physical debility no longer enervated my judgment; my mind felt prompt
and clear.
Just as I finished dressing, a tap came to the door: I said, "Come
in," expecting the chambermaid, whereas a rough man walked in and
said,--
"Gif me your keys, Meess."
"Why?" I asked.
"Gif!" said he impatiently; and as he half-snatched them from my hand,
he added, "All right! haf your tronc soon."
Fortunately it did turn out all right: he was from the custom-house.
Where to go to get some breakfast I could not tell; but I proceeded,
not without hesitation, to descend.
I now observed, what I had not noticed in my extreme weariness last
night, viz. that this inn was, in fact, a large hotel; and as I slowly
descended the broad staircase, halting on each step (for I was in
wonderfully little haste to get down), I gazed at the high ceiling
above me, at the painted walls around, at the wide windows which
filled the house with light, at the veined marble I trod (for the
steps were all of marble, though uncarpeted and not very clean), and
contrasting all this with the dimensions of the closet assigned to me
as a chamber, with the extreme modesty of its appointments, I fell
into a philosophizing mood.
Much I marvelled at the sagacity evinced by waiters and chamber-maids
in proportioning the accommodation to the guest. How could inn-
servants and ship-stewardesses everywhere tell at a glance that I, for
instance, was an individual of no social significance, and little
burdened by cash? They _did_ know it evidently: I saw quite well
that they all, in a moment's calculation, estimated me at about the
same fractional value. The fact seemed to me curious and pregnant: I
would not disguise from myself what it indicated, yet managed to keep
up my spirits pretty well under its pressure.
Having at last landed in a great hall, full of skylight glare, I made
my way somehow to what proved to be the coffee-room. It cannot be
denied that on entering this room I trembled somewhat; felt uncertain,
solitary, wretched; wished to Heaven I knew whether I was doing right
or wrong; felt convinced that it was the last, but could not help
myself. Acting in the spirit and with the calm of a fatalist, I sat
down at a small table, to which a waiter presently brought me some
breakfast; and I partook of that meal in a frame of mind not greatly
calculated to favour digestion. There were many other people
breakfasting at other tables in the room; I should have felt rather
more happy if amongst them all I could have seen any women; however,
there was not one--all present were men. But nobody seemed to think I
was doing anything strange; one or two gentlemen glanced at me
occasionally, but none stared obtrusively: I suppose if there was
anything eccentric in the business, they accounted for it by this word
"Anglaise!"
Breakfast over, I must again move--in what direction? "Go to
Villette," said an inward voice; prompted doubtless by the
recollection of this slight sentence uttered carelessly and at random
by Miss Fanshawe, as she bid me good-by: "I wish you would come to
Madame Beck's; she has some marmots whom you might look after; she
wants an English gouvernante, or was wanting one two months ago."
Who Madame Beck was, where she lived, I knew not; I had asked, but the
question passed unheard: Miss Fanshawe, hurried