it had been pressed, and softly caressed the heedless foot.
When summoned by her nurse she rose and departed very obediently,
having bid us all a subdued good-night.
I will not say that I dreaded going to bed, an hour later; yet I
certainly went with an unquiet anticipation that I should find that
child in no peaceful sleep. The forewarning of my instinct was but
fulfilled, when I discovered her, all cold and vigilant, perched like
a white bird on the outside of the bed. I scarcely knew how to accost
her; she was not to be managed like another child. She, however,
accosted me. As I closed the door, and put the light on the dressing-
table, she turned tome with these words:--"I cannot--_cannot_
sleep; and in this way I cannot--_cannot_ live!"
I asked what ailed her.
"Dedful miz-er-y!" said she, with her piteous lisp.
"Shall I call Mrs. Bretton?"
"That is downright silly," was her impatient reply; and, indeed, I
well knew that if she had heard Mrs. Bretton's foot approach, she
would have nestled quiet as a mouse under the bedclothes. Whilst
lavishing her eccentricities regardlessly before me--for whom she
professed scarcely the semblance of affection--she never showed my
godmother one glimpse of her inner self: for her, she was nothing but
a docile, somewhat quaint little maiden. I examined her; her cheek was
crimson; her dilated eye was both troubled and glowing, and painfully
restless: in this state it was obvious she must not be left till
morning. I guessed how the case stood.
"Would you like to bid Graham good-night again?" I asked. "He is not
gone to his room yet."
She at once stretched out her little arms to be lifted. Folding a
shawl round her, I carried her back to the drawing-room. Graham was
just coming out.
"She cannot sleep without seeing and speaking to you once more," I
said. "She does not like the thought of leaving you."
"I've spoilt her," said he, taking her from me with good humour, and
kissing her little hot face and burning lips. "Polly, you care for me
more than for papa, now--"
"I _do_ care for you, but you care nothing for me," was her
whisper.
She was assured to the contrary, again kissed, restored to me, and I
carried her away; but, alas! not soothed.
When I thought she could listen to me, I said--"Paulina, you should
not grieve that Graham does not care for you so much as you care for
him. It must be so."
Her lifted and questioning eyes asked why.
"Because he is a boy and you are a girl; he is sixteen and you are
only six; his nature is strong and gay, and yours is otherwise."
"But I love him so much; he _should_ love me a little."
"He does. He is fond of you. You are his favourite."
"Am I Graham's favourite?"
"Yes, more than any little child I know."
The assurance soothed her; she smiled in her anguish.
"But," I continued, "don't fret, and don't expect too much of him, or
else he will feel you to be troublesome, and then it is all over."
"All over!" she echoed softly; "then I'll be good. I'll try to be
good, Lucy Snowe."
I put her to bed.
"Will he forgive me this one time?" she asked, as I undressed myself.
I assured her that he would; that as yet he was by no means alienated;
that she had only to be careful for the future.
"There is no future," said she: "I am going. Shall I ever--ever--see
him again, after I leave England?"
I returned an encouraging response. The candle being extinguished, a
still half-hour elapsed. I thought her asleep, when the little white
shape once more lifted itself in the crib, and the small voice asked--
"Do you like Graham, Miss Snowe?"
"Like him! Yes, a little."
"Only a little! Do you like him as I do?"
"I think not. No: not as you do."
"Do you like him much?"
"I told you I liked him a little. Where is the use of caring for him
so very much: he is full of faults."
"Is he?"
"All boys are."
"More than girls?"
"Very likely. Wise people say it is folly to think anybody perfect;
and as to likes and dislikes, we should be friendly to all, and
worship none."
"Are you a wise person?"
"I mean to try to be so. Go to sleep."
"I _cannot_ go to sleep. Have you no pain just here" (laying her
elfish hand on her elfish breast,) "when you think _you_ shall
have to leave Graham; for _your_ home is not here?"
"Surely, Polly," said I, "you should not feel so much pain when you
are very soon going to rejoin your father. Have you forgotten him? Do
you no longer wish to be his little companion?"
Dead silence succeeded this question.
"Child, lie down and sleep," I urged.
"My bed is cold," said she. "I can't warm it."
I saw the little thing shiver. "Come to me," I said, wishing, yet
scarcely hoping, that she would comply: for she was a most strange,
capricious, little creature, and especially whimsical with me. She
came, however, instantly, like a small ghost gliding over the carpet.
I took her in. She was chill: I warmed her in my arms. She trembled
nervously; I soothed her. Thus tranquillized and cherished she at last
slumbered.
"A very unique child," thought I, as I viewed her sleeping countenance
by the fitful moonlight, and cautiously and softly wiped her
glittering eyelids and her wet cheeks with my handkerchief. "How will
she get through this world, or battle with this life? How will she
bear the shocks and repulses, the humiliations and desolations, which
books, and my own reason, tell me are prepared for all flesh?"
She departed the next day; trembling like a leaf when she took leave,
but exercising self-command.
CHAPTER IV.
MISS MARCHMONT.
On quitting Bretton, which I did a few weeks after Paulina's
departure--little thinking then I was never again to visit it; never
more to tread its calm old streets--I betook myself home, having been
absent six months. It will be conjectured that I was of course glad to
return to the bosom of my kindred. Well! the amiable conjecture does
no harm, and may therefore be safely left uncontradicted. Far from
saying nay, indeed, I will permit the reader to picture me, for the
next eight years, as a bark slumbering through halcyon weather, in a
harbour still as glass--the steersman stretched on the little deck,
his face up to heaven, his eyes