be, there are good Romanists: this
man, Emanuel, seemed of the best; touched with superstition,
influenced by priestcraft, yet wondrous for fond faith, for pious
devotion, for sacrifice of self, for charity unbounded. It remained to
see how Rome, by her agents, handled such qualities; whether she
cherished them for their own sake and for God's, or put them out to
usury and made booty of the interest.
By the time I reached home, it was sundown. Goton had kindly saved me
a portion of dinner, which indeed I needed. She called me into the
little cabinet to partake of it, and there Madame Beck soon made her
appearance, bringing me a glass of wine.
"Well," began she, chuckling, "and what sort of a reception did Madame
Walravens give you? Elle est drole, n'est-ce pas?"
I told her what had passed, delivering verbatim the courteous message
with which I had been charged.
"Oh la singuliere petite bossue!" laughed she. "Et figurez-vous
qu'elle me deteste, parcequ'elle me croit amoureuse de mon cousin
Paul; ce petit devot qui n'ose pas bouger, a moins que son confesseur
ne lui donne la permission! Au reste" (she went on), "if he wanted to
marry ever so much--soit moi, soit une autre--he could not do it; he
has too large a family already on his hands: Mere Walravens, Pere
Silas, Dame Agnes, and a whole troop of nameless paupers. There never
was a man like him for laying on himself burdens greater than he can
bear, voluntarily incurring needless responsibilities. Besides, he
harbours a romantic idea about some pale-faced Marie Justine--
personnage assez niaise a ce que je pense" (such was Madame's
irreverent remark), "who has been an angel in heaven, or elsewhere,
this score of years, and to whom he means to go, free from all earthly
ties, pure comme un lis, a ce qu'il dit. Oh, you would laugh could you
but know half M. Emanuel's crotchets and eccentricities! But I hinder
you from taking refreshment, ma bonne Meess, which you must need; eat
your supper, drink your wine, oubliez les anges, les bossues, et
surtout, les Professeurs--et bon soir!"
CHAPTER XXXV
FRATERNITY.
"Oubliez les Professeurs." So said Madame Beck. Madame Beck was a
wise woman, but she should not have uttered those words. To do so was
a mistake. That night she should have left me calm--not excited,
indifferent, not interested, isolated in my own estimation and that of
others--not connected, even in idea, with this second person whom I
was to forget.
Forget him? Ah! they took a sage plan to make me forget him--the
wiseheads! They showed me how good he was; they made of my dear little
man a stainless little hero. And then they had prated about his manner
of loving. What means had I, before this day, of being certain whether
he could love at all or not?
I had known him jealous, suspicious; I had seen about him certain
tendernesses, fitfulnesses--a softness which came like a warm air, and
a ruth which passed like early dew, dried in the heat of his
irritabilities: _this_ was all I had seen. And they, Pere Silas
and Modeste Maria Beck (that these two wrought in concert I could not
doubt) opened up the adytum of his heart--showed me one grand love,
the child of this southern nature's youth, born so strong and perfect,
that it had laughed at Death himself, despised his mean rape of
matter, clung to immortal spirit, and in victory and faith, had
watched beside a tomb twenty years.
This had been done--not idly: this was not a mere hollow indulgence of
sentiment; he had proven his fidelity by the consecration of his best
energies to an unselfish purpose, and attested it by limitless
personal sacrifices: for those once dear to her he prized--he had laid
down vengeance, and taken up a cross.
Now, as for Justine Marie, I knew what she was as well as if I had
seen her. I knew she was well enough; there were girls like her in
Madame Beck's school--phlegmatics--pale, slow, inert, but kind-
natured, neutral of evil, undistinguished for good.
If she wore angels' wings, I knew whose poet-fancy conferred them. If
her forehead shone luminous with the reflex of a halo, I knew in the
fire of whose irids that circlet of holy flame had generation.
Was I, then, to be frightened by Justine Marie? Was the picture of a
pale dead nun to rise, an eternal barrier? And what of the charities
which absorbed his worldly goods? What of his heart sworn to
virginity?
Madame Beck--Pere Silas--you should not have suggested these
questions. They were at once the deepest puzzle, the strongest
obstruction, and the keenest stimulus, I had ever felt. For a week of
nights and days I fell asleep--I dreamt, and I woke upon these two
questions. In the whole world there was no answer to them, except
where one dark little man stood, sat, walked, lectured, under the
head-piece of a bandit bonnet-grec, and within the girth of a sorry
paletot, much be-inked, and no little adust.
After that visit to the Rue des Mages, I _did_ want to see him
again. I felt as if--knowing what I now knew--his countenance would
offer a page more lucid, more interesting than ever; I felt a longing
to trace in it the imprint of that primitive devotedness, the signs of
that half-knightly, half-saintly chivalry which the priest's narrative
imputed to his nature. He had become my Christian hero: under that
character I wanted to view him.
Nor was opportunity slow to favour; my new impressions underwent her
test the next day. Yes: I was granted an interview with my "Christian
hero"--an interview not very heroic, or sentimental, or biblical, but
lively enough in its way.
About three o'clock of the afternoon, the peace of the first classe--
safely established, as it seemed, under the serene sway of Madame
Beck, who, _in propria persona_ was giving one of her orderly and
useful lessons--this peace, I say, suffered a sudden fracture by the
wild inburst of a paletot.
Nobody at the moment was quieter than myself. Eased of responsibility
by Madame Beck's presence, soothed by her uniform tones, pleased and
edified with her clear exposition of the subject in hand (for she
taught well), I sat bent over my desk, drawing--that is, copying an
elaborate line engraving, tediously working up my copy to the finish
of the original, for that was my practical notion of art; and, strange
to say, I took extreme pleasure in the labour, and could even produce
curiously