side of the ferry by which he was
about to travel to the north, and cried with a loud voice, 'My lord the
king, if you pass this water you will never return again alive!'"--(VIDE
the HISTORY OF SCOTLAND).
I looked up in amazement; the voice was a voice of Albion; the accent
was pure and silvery; it only wanted firmness, and assurance, to be the
counterpart of what any well-educated lady in Essex or Middlesex might
have enounced, yet the speaker or reader was no other than Mdlle. Henri,
in whose grave, joyless face I saw no mark of consciousness that she had
performed any extraordinary feat. No one else evinced surprise either.
Mdlle. Reuter knitted away assiduously; I was aware, however, that at
the conclusion of the paragraph, she had lifted her eyelid and honoured
me with a glance sideways; she did not know the full excellency of the
teacher's style of reading, but she perceived that her accent was not
that of the others, and wanted to discover what I thought; I masked my
visage with indifference, and ordered the next girl to proceed.
When the lesson was over, I took advantage of the confusion caused by
breaking up, to approach Mdlle. Henri; she was standing near the window
and retired as I advanced; she thought I wanted to look out, and did
not imagine that I could have anything to say to her. I took her
exercise-book; out of her hand; as I turned over the leaves I addressed
her:--
"You have had lessons in English before?" I asked.
"No, sir."
"No! you read it well; you have been in England?"
"Oh, no!" with some animation.
"You have been in English families?"
Still the answer was "No." Here my eye, resting on the flyleaf of the
book, saw written, "Frances Evan Henri."
"Your name?" I asked
"Yes, sir."
My interrogations were cut short; I heard a little rustling behind me,
and close at my back was the directress, professing to be examining the
interior of a desk.
"Mademoiselle," said she, looking up and addressing the teacher, "Will
you have the goodness to go and stand in the corridor, while the young
ladies are putting on their things, and try to keep some order?"
Mdlle. Henri obeyed.
"What splendid weather!" observed the directress cheerfully, glancing at
the same time from the window. I assented and was withdrawing. "What of
your new pupil, monsieur?" continued she, following my retreating steps.
"Is she likely to make progress in English?"
"Indeed I can hardly judge. She possesses a pretty good accent; of
her real knowledge of the language I have as yet had no opportunity of
forming an opinion."
"And her natural capacity, monsieur? I have had my fears about that: can
you relieve me by an assurance at least of its average power?"
"I see no reason to doubt its average power, mademoiselle, but really
I scarcely know her, and have not had time to study the calibre of her
capacity. I wish you a very good afternoon."
She still pursued me. "You will observe, monsieur, and tell me what you
think; I could so much better rely on your opinion than on my own; women
cannot judge of these things as men can, and, excuse my pertinacity,
monsieur, but it is natural I should feel interested about this poor
little girl (pauvre petite); she has scarcely any relations, her own
efforts are all she has to look to, her acquirements must be her sole
fortune; her present position has once been mine, or nearly so; it is
then but natural I should sympathize with her; and sometimes when I see
the difficulty she has in managing pupils, I reel quite chagrined.
I doubt not she does her best, her intentions are excellent; but,
monsieur, she wants tact and firmness. I have talked to her on the
subject, but I am not fluent, and probably did not express myself
with clearness; she never appears to comprehend me. Now, would you
occasionally, when you see an opportunity, slip in a word of advice
to her on the subject; men have so much more influence than women
have--they argue so much more logically than we do; and you, monsieur,
in particular, have so paramount a power of making yourself obeyed;
a word of advice from you could not but do her good; even if she were
sullen and headstrong (which I hope she is not), she would scarcely
refuse to listen to you; for my own part, I can truly say that I never
attend one of your lessons without deriving benefit from witnessing your
management of the pupils. The other masters are a constant source of
anxiety to me; they cannot impress the young ladies with sentiments of
respect, nor restrain the levity natural to youth: in you, monsieur, I
feel the most absolute confidence; try then to put this poor child
into the way of controlling our giddy, high-spirited Brabantoises.
But, monsieur, I would add one word more; don't alarm her AMOUR PROPRE;
beware of inflicting a wound there. I reluctantly admit that in that
particular she is blameably--some would say ridiculously--susceptible.
I fear I have touched this sore point inadvertently, and she cannot get
over it."
During the greater part of this harangue my hand was on the lock of the
outer door; I now turned it.
"Au revoir, mademoiselle," said I, and I escaped. I saw the directress's
stock of words was yet far from exhausted. She looked after me, she
would fain have detained me longer. Her manner towards me had
been altered ever since I had begun to treat her with hardness and
indifference: she almost cringed to me on every occasion; she consulted
my countenance incessantly, and beset me with innumerable little
officious attentions. Servility creates despotism. This slavish homage,
instead of softening my heart, only pampered whatever was stern and
exacting in its mood. The very circumstance of her hovering round me
like a fascinated bird, seemed to transform me into a rigid pillar of
stone; her flatteries irritated my scorn, her blandishments confirmed
my reserve. At times I wondered what she meant by giving herself such
trouble to win me, when the more profitable Pelet was already in her
nets, and when, too, she was aware that I possessed her secret, for I
had not scrupled to tell her as much: but the fact is that as it was
her nature to doubt the reality and under-value the worth of modesty,
affection, disinterestedness--to regard these qualities as foibles of
character--so it was