moon, "stay
with us: all is truly quiet now; for another quarter of an hour your
presence will not be missed: the day's heat and bustle have tired you;
enjoy these precious minutes."
The windowless backs of houses built in this garden, and in particular
the whole of one side, was skirted by the rear of a long line of
premises--being the boarding-houses of the neighbouring college. This
rear, however, was all blank stone, with the exception of certain
attic loopholes high up, opening from the sleeping-rooms of the women-
servants, and also one casement in a lower story said to mark the
chamber or study of a master. But, though thus secure, an alley, which
ran parallel with the very high wall on that side the garden, was
forbidden to be entered by the pupils. It was called indeed "l'allee
defendue," and any girl setting foot there would have rendered herself
liable to as severe a penalty as the mild rules of Madame Beck's
establishment permitted. Teachers might indeed go there with impunity;
but as the walk was narrow, and the neglected shrubs were grown very
thick and close on each side, weaving overhead a roof of branch and
leaf which the sun's rays penetrated but in rare chequers, this alley
was seldom entered even during day, and after dusk was carefully
shunned.
From the first I was tempted to make an exception to this rule of
avoidance: the seclusion, the very gloom of the walk attracted me. For
a long time the fear of seeming singular scared me away; but by
degrees, as people became accustomed to me and my habits, and to such
shades of peculiarity as were engrained in my nature--shades,
certainly not striking enough to interest, and perhaps not prominent
enough to offend, but born in and with me, and no more to be parted
with than my identity--by slow degrees I became a frequenter of this
strait and narrow path. I made myself gardener of some tintless
flowers that grew between its closely-ranked shrubs; I cleared away
the relics of past autumns, choking up a rustic seat at the far end.
Borrowing of Goton, the cuisiniere, a pail of water and a scrubbing-
brush, I made this seat clean. Madame saw me at work and smiled
approbation: whether sincerely or not I don't know; but she
_seemed_ sincere.
"Voyez-vous," cried she, "comme elle est propre, cette demoiselle
Lucie? Vous aimez done cette allee, Meess?" "Yes," I said, "it is
quiet and shady."
"C'est juste," cried she with an air of bonte; and she kindly
recommended me to confine myself to it as much as I chose, saying,
that as I was not charged with the surveillance, I need not trouble
myself to walk with the pupils: only I might permit her children to
come there, to talk English with me.
On the night in question, I was sitting on the hidden seat reclaimed
from fungi and mould, listening to what seemed the far-off sounds of
the city. Far off, in truth, they were not: this school was in the
city's centre; hence, it was but five minutes' walk to the park,
scarce ten to buildings of palatial splendour. Quite near were wide
streets brightly lit, teeming at this moment with life: carriages were
rolling through them to balls or to the opera. The same hour which
tolled curfew for our convent, which extinguished each lamp, and
dropped the curtain round each couch, rang for the gay city about us
the summons to festal enjoyment. Of this contrast I thought not,
however: gay instincts my nature had few; ball or opera I had never
seen; and though often I had heard them described, and even wished to
see them, it was not the wish of one who hopes to partake a pleasure
if she could only reach it--who feels fitted to shine in some bright
distant sphere, could she but thither win her way; it was no yearning
to attain, no hunger to taste; only the calm desire to look on a new
thing.
A moon was in the sky, not a full moon, but a young crescent. I saw
her through a space in the boughs overhead. She and the stars, visible
beside her, were no strangers where all else was strange: my childhood
knew them. I had seen that golden sign with the dark globe in its
curve leaning back on azure, beside an old thorn at the top of an old
field, in Old England, in long past days, just as it now leaned back
beside a stately spire in this continental capital.
Oh, my childhood! I had feelings: passive as I lived, little as I
spoke, cold as I looked, when I thought of past days, I _could_
feel. About the present, it was better to be stoical; about the
future--such a future as mine--to be dead. And in catalepsy and a dead
trance, I studiously held the quick of my nature.
At that time, I well remember whatever could excite--certain accidents
of the weather, for instance, were almost dreaded by me, because they
woke the being I was always lulling, and stirred up a craving cry I
could not satisfy. One night a thunder-storm broke; a sort of
hurricane shook us in our beds: the Catholics rose in panic and prayed
to their saints. As for me, the tempest took hold of me with tyranny:
I was roughly roused and obliged to live. I got up and dressed myself,
and creeping outside the casement close by my bed, sat on its ledge,
with my feet on the roof of a lower adjoining building. It was wet, it
was wild, it was pitch-dark. Within the dormitory they gathered round
the night-lamp in consternation, praying loud. I could not go in: too
resistless was the delight of staying with the wild hour, black and
full of thunder, pealing out such an ode as language never delivered
to man--too terribly glorious, the spectacle of clouds, split and
pierced by white and blinding bolts.
I did long, achingly, then and for four and twenty hours afterwards,
for something to fetch me out of my present existence, and lead me
upwards and onwards. This longing, and all of a similar kind, it was
necessary to knock on the head; which I did, figuratively, after the
manner of Jael to Sisera, driving a nail through their temples. Unlike
Sisera, they did not die: they were but transiently stunned, and at
intervals would turn on the nail with a rebellious wrench: