not justly be deemed amenable to reprimand or
penalty for having permitted a slightly freer action than usual to the
muscles about my eyes and mouth.
The supper, consisting of bread, and milk diluted with tepid water,
was brought in. In respectful consideration of the Professor's
presence, the rolls and glasses were allowed to stand instead of being
immediately handed round.
"Take your supper, ladies," said he, seeming to be occupied in making
marginal notes to his "Williams Shackspire." They took it. I also
accepted a roll and glass, but being now more than ever interested in
my work, I kept my seat of punishment, and wrought while I munched my
bread and sipped my beverage, the whole with easy _sang-froid_;
with a certain snugness of composure, indeed, scarcely in my habits,
and pleasantly novel to my feelings. It seemed as if the presence of a
nature so restless, chafing, thorny as that of M. Paul absorbed all
feverish and unsettling influences like a magnet, and left me none but
such as were placid and harmonious.
He rose. "Will he go away without saying another word?" Yes; he turned
to the door.
No: he _re_-turned on his steps; but only, perhaps, to take his
pencil-case, which had been left on the table.
He took it--shut the pencil in and out, broke its point against the
wood, re-cut and pocketed it, and . . . walked promptly up to me.
The girls and teachers, gathered round the other table, were talking
pretty freely: they always talked at meals; and, from the constant
habit of speaking fast and loud at such times, did not now subdue
their voices much.
M. Paul came and stood behind me. He asked at what I was working; and
I said I was making a watchguard.
He asked, "For whom?" And I answered, "For a gentleman--one of my
friends."
M. Paul stooped down and proceeded--as novel-writers say, and, as was
literally true in his case--to "hiss" into my ear some poignant words.
He said that, of all the women he knew, I was the one who could make
herself the most consummately unpleasant: I was she with whom it was
least possible to live on friendly terms. I had a "caractere
intraitable," and perverse to a miracle. How I managed it, or what
possessed me, he, for his part, did not know; but with whatever
pacific and amicable intentions a person accosted me--crac! I turned
concord to discord, good-will to enmity. He was sure, he--M. Paul--
wished me well enough; he had never done me any harm that he knew of;
he might, at least, he supposed, claim a right to be regarded as a
neutral acquaintance, guiltless of hostile sentiments: yet, how I
behaved to him! With what pungent vivacities--what an impetus of
mutiny--what a "fougue" of injustice!
Here I could not avoid opening my eyes somewhat wide, and even
slipping in a slight interjectional observation: "Vivacities? Impetus?
Fougue? I didn't know...."
"Chut! a l'instant! There! there I went--vive comme la poudre!" He was
sorry--he was very sorry: for my sake he grieved over the hapless
peculiarity. This "emportement," this "chaleur"--generous, perhaps,
but excessive--would yet, he feared, do me a mischief. It was a pity:
I was not--he believed, in his soul--wholly without good qualities:
and would I but hear reason, and be more sedate, more sober, less "en
l'air," less "coquette," less taken by show, less prone to set an
undue value on outside excellence--to make much of the attentions of
people remarkable chiefly for so many feet of stature, "des couleurs
de poupee," "un nez plus ou moins bien fait," and an enormous amount
of fatuity--I might yet prove an useful, perhaps an exemplary
character. But, as it was--And here, the little man's voice was for a
minute choked.
I would have looked up at him, or held out my hand, or said a soothing
word; but I was afraid, if I stirred, I should either laugh or cry; so
odd, in all this, was the mixture of the touching and the absurd.
I thought he had nearly done: but no; he sat down that he might go on
at his ease.
"While he, M. Paul, was on these painful topics, he would dare my
anger for the sake of my good, and would venture to refer to a change
he had noticed in my dress. He was free to confess that when he first
knew me--or, rather, was in the habit of catching a passing glimpse of
me from time to time--I satisfied him on this point: the gravity, the
austere simplicity, obvious in this particular, were such as to
inspire the highest hopes for my best interests. What fatal influence
had impelled me lately to introduce flowers under the brim of my
bonnet, to wear 'des cols brodes,' and even to appear on one occasion
in a _scarlet gown_--he might indeed conjecture, but, for the
present, would not openly declare."
Again I interrupted, and this time not without an accent at once
indignant and horror-struck.
"Scarlet, Monsieur Paul? It was not scarlet! It was pink, and pale
pink to: and further subdued by black lace."
"Pink or scarlet, yellow or crimson, pea-green or sky-blue, it was all
one: these were all flaunting, giddy colours; and as to the lace I
talked of, _that_ was but a 'colifichet de plus.'" And he sighed
over my degeneracy. "He could not, he was sorry to say, be so
particular on this theme as he could wish: not possessing the exact
names of these 'babioles,' he might run into small verbal errors which
would not fail to lay him open to my sarcasm, and excite my unhappily
sudden and passionate disposition. He would merely say, in general
terms--and in these general terms he knew he was correct--that my
costume had of late assumed 'des facons mondaines,' which it wounded
him to see."
What "facons mondaines" he discovered in my present winter merino and
plain white collar, I own it puzzled me to guess: and when I asked
him, he said it was all made with too much attention to effect--and
besides, "had I not a bow of ribbon at my neck?"
"And if you condemn a bow of ribbon for a lady, Monsieur, you would
necessarily disapprove of a thing like this for a gentleman?"--holding
up my bright little chainlet of silk and gold. His sole reply was a
groan--I suppose over my levity.
After sitting some minutes in silence, and watching the progress of
the chain, at which I now wrought more assiduously than ever, he
inquired: