semicircle; he was passing round, giving his
farewells, pressing each hand, touching with his lips each cheek. This
last ceremony, foreign custom permitted at such a parting--so solemn,
to last so long.
I felt it hard that Madame Beck should dog me thus; following and
watching me close; my neck and shoulder shrunk in fever under her
breath; I became terribly goaded.
He was approaching; the semicircle was almost travelled round; he came
to the last pupil; he turned. But Madame was before me; she had
stepped out suddenly; she seemed to magnify her proportions and
amplify her drapery; she eclipsed me; I was hid. She knew my weakness
and deficiency; she could calculate the degree of moral paralysis--the
total default of self-assertion--with which, in a crisis, I could be
struck. She hastened to her kinsman, she broke upon him volubly, she
mastered his attention, she hurried him to the door--the glass-door
opening on the garden. I think he looked round; could I but have
caught his eye, courage, I think, would have rushed in to aid feeling,
and there would have been a charge, and, perhaps, a rescue; but
already the room was all confusion, the semicircle broken into groups,
my figure was lost among thirty more conspicuous. Madame had her will;
yes, she got him away, and he had not seen me; he thought me absent.
Five o'clock struck, the loud dismissal-bell rang, the school
separated, the room emptied.
There seems, to my memory, an entire darkness and distraction in
some certain minutes I then passed alone--a grief inexpressible over
a loss unendurable. _What_ should I do; oh! _what_ should I do;
when all my life's hope was thus torn by the roots out of my riven,
outraged heart?
What I _should_ have done, I know not, when a little child--the
least child in the school--broke with its simplicity and its
unconsciousness into the raging yet silent centre of that inward
conflict.
"Mademoiselle," lisped the treble voice, "I am to give you that. M.
Paul said I was to seek you all over the house, from the grenier to
the cellar, and when I found you, to give you that."
And the child delivered a note; the little dove dropped on my knee,
its olive leaf plucked off. I found neither address nor name, only
these words:--
"It was not my intention to take leave of you when I said good-by to
the rest, but I hoped to see you in classe. I was disappointed. The
interview is deferred. Be ready for me. Ere I sail, I must see you at
leisure, and speak with you at length. Be ready; my moments are
numbered, and, just now, monopolized; besides, I have a private
business on hand which I will not share with any, nor communicate--
even to you.--PAUL."
"Be ready?" Then it must be this evening: was he not to go on the
morrow? Yes; of that point I was certain. I had seen the date of his
vessel's departure advertised. Oh! _I_ would be ready, but could
that longed-for meeting really be achieved? the time was so short, the
schemers seemed so watchful, so active, so hostile; the way of access
appeared strait as a gully, deep as a chasm--Apollyon straddled across
it, breathing flames. Could my Greatheart overcome? Could my guide
reach me?
Who might tell? Yet I began to take some courage, some comfort; it
seemed to me that I felt a pulse of his heart beating yet true to the
whole throb of mine.
I waited my champion. Apollyon came trailing his Hell behind him. I
think if Eternity held torment, its form would not be fiery rack, nor
its nature despair. I think that on a certain day amongst those days
which never dawned, and will not set, an angel entered Hades--stood,
shone, smiled, delivered a prophecy of conditional pardon, kindled a
doubtful hope of bliss to come, not now, but at a day and hour
unlooked for, revealed in his own glory and grandeur the height and
compass of his promise: spoke thus--then towering, became a star, and
vanished into his own Heaven. His legacy was suspense--a worse boon
than despair.
All that evening I waited, trusting in the dove-sent olive-leaf, yet
in the midst of my trust, terribly fearing. My fear pressed heavy.
Cold and peculiar, I knew it for the partner of a rarely-belied
presentiment. The first hours seemed long and slow; in spirit I clung
to the flying skirts of the last. They passed like drift cloud--like
the wrack scudding before a storm.
They passed. All the long, hot summer day burned away like a Yule-log;
the crimson of its close perished; I was left bent among the cool blue
shades, over the pale and ashen gleams of its night.
Prayers were over; it was bed-time; my co-inmates were all retired. I
still remained in the gloomy first classe, forgetting, or at least
disregarding, rules I had never forgotten or disregarded before.
How long I paced that classe I cannot tell; I must have been afoot
many hours; mechanically had I moved aside benches and desks, and had
made for myself a path down its length. There I walked, and there,
when certain that the whole household were abed, and quite out of
hearing--there, I at last wept. Reliant on Night, confiding in
Solitude, I kept my tears sealed, my sobs chained, no longer; they
heaved my heart; they tore their way. In this house, what grief could
be sacred?
Soon after eleven o'clock--a very late hour in the Rue Fossette--the
door unclosed, quietly but not stealthily; a lamp's flame invaded the
moonlight; Madame Beck entered, with the same composed air, as if
coming on an ordinary occasion, at an ordinary season. Instead of at
once addressing me, she went to her desk, took her keys, and seemed to
seek something: she loitered over this feigned search long, too long.
She was calm, too calm; my mood scarce endured the pretence; driven
beyond common range, two hours since I had left behind me wonted
respects and fears. Led by a touch, and ruled by a word, under usual
circumstances, no yoke could now be borne--no curb obeyed.
"It is more than time for retirement," said Madame; "the rule of the
house has already been transgressed too long."
Madame met no answer: I did not check my walk; when she came in my
way, I put her out of it.
"Let me persuade you to calm, Meess; let me lead you to your chamber,"
said she, trying to speak softly.
"No!" I