could swallow--whether it was
possible it could feed to satiety--whether any whisper of
consideration for others could penetrate her heart, and moderate its
vainglorious exultation.
Not at all. She turned me and herself round; she viewed us both on all
sides; she smiled, she waved her curls, she retouched her sash, she
spread her dress, and finally, letting go my arm, and curtseying with
mock respect, she said: "I would not be you for a kingdom."
The remark was too _naive_ to rouse anger; I merely said: "Very
good."
"And what would _you_ give to be ME?" she inquired.
"Not a bad sixpence--strange as it may sound," I replied. "You are but
a poor creature."
"You don't think so in your heart."
"No; for in my heart you have not the outline of a place: I only
occasionally turn you over in my brain."
"Well, but," said she, in an expostulatory tone, "just listen to the
difference of our positions, and then see how happy am I, and how
miserable are you."
"Go on; I listen."
"In the first place: I am the daughter of a gentleman of family, and
though my father is not rich, I have expectations from an uncle.
Then, I am just eighteen, the finest age possible. I have had a
continental education, and though I can't spell, I have abundant
accomplishments. I _am_ pretty; _you_ can't deny that; I may have
as many admirers as I choose. This very night I have been breaking the
hearts of two gentlemen, and it is the dying look I had from one of them
just now, which puts me in such spirits. I do so like to watch them turn
red and pale, and scowl and dart fiery glances at each other, and
languishing ones at me. There is _me_--happy ME; now for _you_,
poor soul!
"I suppose you are nobody's daughter, since you took care of little
children when you first came to Villette: you have no relations; you
can't call yourself young at twenty-three; you have no attractive
accomplishments--no beauty. As to admirers, you hardly know what they
are; you can't even talk on the subject: you sit dumb when the other
teachers quote their conquests. I believe you never were in love, and
never will be: you don't know the feeling, and so much the better, for
though you might have your own heart broken, no living heart will you
ever break. Isn't it all true?"
"A good deal of it is true as gospel, and shrewd besides. There must
be good in you, Ginevra, to speak so honestly; that snake, Zelie St.
Pierre, could not utter what you have uttered. Still, Miss Fanshawe,
hapless as I am, according to your showing, sixpence I would not give
to purchase you, body and soul."
"Just because I am not clever, and that is all _you_ think of.
Nobody in the world but you cares for cleverness."
"On the contrary, I consider you _are_ clever, in your way--very
smart indeed. But you were talking of breaking hearts--that edifying
amusement into the merits of which I don't quite enter; pray on whom
does your vanity lead you to think you have done execution to-night?"
She approached her lips to my ear--"Isidore and Alfred de Hamal are
both here?" she whispered.
"Oh! they are? I should like to see them."
"There's a dear creature! your curiosity is roused at last. Follow me,
I will point them out."
She proudly led the way--"But you cannot see them well from the
classes," said she, turning, "Madame keeps them too far off. Let us
cross the garden, enter by the corridor, and get close to them behind:
we shall be scolded if we are seen, but never mind."
For once, I did not mind. Through the garden we went--penetrated into
the corridor by a quiet private entrance, and approaching the
_carre_, yet keeping in the corridor shade, commanded a near view
of the band of "jeunes gens."
I believe I could have picked out the conquering de Hamal even
undirected. He was a straight-nosed, very correct-featured little
dandy. I say _little_ dandy, though he was not beneath the middle
standard in stature; but his lineaments were small, and so were his
hands and feet; and he was pretty and smooth, and as trim as a doll:
so nicely dressed, so nicely curled, so booted and gloved and
cravated--he was charming indeed. I said so. "What, a dear personage!"
cried I, and commended Ginevra's taste warmly; and asked her what she
thought de Hamal might have done with the precious fragments of that
heart she had broken--whether he kept them in a scent-vial, and
conserved them in otto of roses? I observed, too, with deep rapture of
approbation, that the colonel's hands were scarce larger than Miss
Fanshawe's own, and suggested that this circumstance might be
convenient, as he could wear her gloves at a pinch. On his dear curls,
I told her I doated: and as to his low, Grecian brow, and exquisite
classic headpiece, I confessed I had no language to do such
perfections justice.
"And if he were your lover?" suggested the cruelly exultant Ginevra.
"Oh! heavens, what bliss!" said I; "but do not be inhuman, Miss
Fanshawe: to put such thoughts into my head is like showing poor
outcast Cain a far, glimpse of Paradise."
"You like him, then?"
"As I like sweets, and jams, and comfits, and conservatory flowers."
Ginevra admired my taste, for all these things were her adoration; she
could then readily credit that they were mine too.
"Now for Isidore," I went on. I own I felt still more curious to see
him than his rival; but Ginevra was absorbed in the latter.
"Alfred was admitted here to-night," said she, "through the influence
of his aunt, Madame la Baronne de Dorlodot; and now, having seen him,
can you not understand why I have been in such spirits all the
evening, and acted so well, and danced with such life, and why I am
now happy as a queen? Dieu! Dieu! It was such good fun to glance first
at him and then at the other, and madden them both."
"But that other--where is he? Show me Isidore."
"I don't like."
"Why not?"
"I am ashamed of him."
"For what reason?"
"Because--because" (in a whisper) "he has such--such whiskers, orange
--red--there now!"
"The murder is out," I subjoined. "Never mind, show him all the same;
I engage not to faint."
She looked round. Just then an English voice spoke behind her and me.
"You are both standing in a draught; you must leave