head-screen,
common to a score besides myself. The grey dress hardly gave more
definite indication. Madame Beck herself ordinarily wore a grey dress
just now; another teacher, and three of the pensionnaires, had had
grey dresses purchased of the same shade and fabric as mine: it was a
sort of every-day wear which happened at that time to be in vogue.
Meanwhile, as I pondered, I knew I must go in. Lights, moving in the
dormitory, announced that prayers were over, and the pupils going to
bed. Another half-hour and all doors would be locked--all lights
extinguished. The front door yet stood open, to admit into the heated
house the coolness of the summer night; from the portress's cabinet
close by shone a lamp, showing the long vestibule with the two-leaved
drawing-room doors on one side, the great street-door closing the
vista.
All at once, quick rang the bell--quick, but not loud--a cautious
tinkle--a sort of warning metal whisper. Rosine darted from her
cabinet and ran to open. The person she admitted stood with her two
minutes in parley: there seemed a demur, a delay. Rosine came to the
garden door, lamp in hand; she stood on the steps, lifting her lamp,
looking round vaguely.
"Quel conte!" she cried, with a coquettish laugh. "Personne n'y a
ete."
"Let me pass," pleaded a voice I knew: "I ask but five minutes;" and a
familiar shape, tall and grand (as we of the Rue Fossette all thought
it), issued from the house, and strode down amongst the beds and
walks. It was sacrilege--the intrusion of a man into that spot, at
that hour; but he knew himself privileged, and perhaps he trusted to
the friendly night. He wandered down the alleys, looking on this side
and on that--he was lost in the shrubs, trampling flowers and breaking
branches in his search--he penetrated at last the "forbidden walk."
There I met him, like some ghost, I suppose.
"Dr. John! it is found."
He did not ask by whom, for with his quick eye he perceived that I
held it in my hand.
"Do not betray her," he said, looking at me as if I were indeed a
dragon.
"Were I ever so disposed to treachery, I cannot betray what I do not
know," was my answer. "Read the note, and you will see how little it
reveals."
"Perhaps you have read it," I thought to myself; and yet I could not
believe he wrote it: that could hardly be his style: besides, I was
fool enough to think there would be a degree of hardship in his
calling me such names. His own look vindicated him; he grew hot, and
coloured as he read.
"This is indeed too much: this is cruel, this is humiliating," were
the words that fell from him.
I thought it _was_ cruel, when I saw his countenance so moved. No
matter whether he was to blame or not; somebody, it seemed to me, must
be more to blame.
"What shall you do about it?" he inquired of me. "Shall you tell
Madame Beck what you have found, and cause a stir--an esclandre?"
I thought I ought to tell, and said so; adding that I did not believe
there would be either stir or esclandre: Madame was much too prudent
to make a noise about an affair of that sort connected with her
establishment.
He stood looking down and meditating. He was both too proud and too
honourable to entreat my secresy on a point which duty evidently
commanded me to communicate. I wished to do right, yet loathed to
grieve or injure him. Just then Rosine glanced out through the open
door; she could not see us, though between the trees I could plainly
see her: her dress was grey, like mine. This circumstance, taken in
connection with prior transactions, suggested to me that perhaps the
case, however deplorable, was one in which I was under no obligation
whatever to concern myself. Accordingly, I said,--"If you can assure
me that none of Madame Beck's pupils are implicated in this business,
I shall be very happy to stand aloof from all interference. Take the
casket, the bouquet, and the billet; for my part, I gladly forget the
whole affair."
"Look there!" he whispered suddenly, as his hand closed on what I
offered, and at the same time he pointed through the boughs.
I looked. Behold Madame, in shawl, wrapping-gown, and slippers, softly
descending the steps, and stealing like a cat round the garden: in two
minutes she would have been upon Dr. John. If _she_ were like a
cat, however, _he_, quite as much, resembled a leopard: nothing
could be lighter than his tread when he chose. He watched, and as she
turned a corner, he took the garden at two noiseless bounds. She
reappeared, and he was gone. Rosine helped him, instantly interposing
the door between him and his huntress. I, too, might have got, away,
but I preferred to meet Madame openly.
Though it was my frequent and well-known custom to spend twilight in
the garden, yet, never till now, had I remained so late. Full sure was
I that Madame had missed--was come in search of me, and designed now
to pounce on the defaulter unawares. I expected a reprimand. No.
Madame was all goodness. She tendered not even a remonstrance; she
testified no shade of surprise. With that consummate tact of hers, in
which I believe she was never surpassed by living thing, she even
professed merely to have issued forth to taste "la brise du soir."
"Quelle belle nuit!" cried she, looking up at the stars--the moon was
now gone down behind the broad tower of Jean Baptiste. "Qu'il fait
bon? que l'air est frais!"
And, instead of sending me in, she detained me to take a few turns
with her down the principal alley. When at last we both re-entered, she
leaned affably on my shoulder by way of support in mounting the front-
door steps; at parting, her cheek was presented to my lips, and "Bon
soir, my bonne amie; dormez bien!" was her kindly adieu for the night.
I caught myself smiling as I lay awake and thoughtful on my couch--
smiling at Madame. The unction, the suavity of her behaviour offered,
for one who knew her, a sure token that suspicion of some kind was
busy in her brain. From some aperture or summit of observation,
through parted bough or open window, she had doubtless caught a
glimpse, remote or near, deceptive or instructive, of that night's
transactions. Finely accomplished as