waited.
Somebody came gliding along the gallery just above; it was the old
priest.
"Indeed Mademoiselle shall not sit there," said he. "It would
displeasure our benefactor if he knew a stranger was so treated in
this house."
And he begged me so earnestly to return to the salon, that, without
discourtesy, I could not but comply. The smaller room was better
furnished and more habitable than the larger; thither he introduced
me. Partially withdrawing the blind, he disclosed what seemed more
like an oratory than a boudoir, a very solemn little chamber, looking
as if it were a place rather dedicated to relics and remembrance, than
designed for present use and comfort.
The good father sat down, as if to keep me company; but instead of
conversing, he took out a book, fastened on the page his eyes, and
employed his lips in whispering--what sounded like a prayer or litany.
A yellow electric light from the sky gilded his bald head; his figure
remained in shade--deep and purple; he sat still as sculpture; he
seemed to forget me for his prayers; he only looked up when a fiercer
bolt, or a harsher, closer rattle told of nearing danger; even then,
it was not in fear, but in seeming awe, he raised his eyes. I too was
awe-struck; being, however, under no pressure of slavish terror, my
thoughts and observations were free.
To speak truth, I was beginning to fancy that the old priest resembled
that Pere Silas, before whom I had kneeled in the church of the
Beguinage. The idea was vague, for I had seen my confessor only in
dusk and in profile, yet still I seemed to trace a likeness: I thought
also I recognized the voice. While I watched him, he betrayed, by one
lifted look, that he felt my scrutiny; I turned to note the room; that
too had its half mystic interest.
Beside a cross of curiously carved old ivory, yellow with time, and
sloped above a dark-red _prie-dieu_, furnished duly, with rich
missal and ebon rosary--hung the picture whose dim outline had drawn
my eyes before--the picture which moved, fell away with the wall and
let in phantoms. Imperfectly seen, I had taken it for a Madonna;
revealed by clearer light, it proved to be a woman's portrait in a
nun's dress. The face, though not beautiful, was pleasing; pale,
young, and shaded with the dejection of grief or ill health. I say
again it was not beautiful; it was not even intellectual; its very
amiability was the amiability of a weak frame, inactive passions,
acquiescent habits: yet I looked long at that picture, and could not
choose but look.
The old priest, who at first had seemed to me so deaf and infirm, must
yet have retained his faculties in tolerable preservation; absorbed in
his book as he appeared, without once lifting his head, or, as far as
I knew, turning his eyes, he perceived the point towards which my
attention was drawn, and, in a slow distinct voice, dropped,
concerning it, these four observations:--
"She was much beloved.
"She gave herself to God.
"She died young.
"She is still remembered, still wept."
"By that aged lady, Madame Walravens?" I inquired, fancying that I
had discovered in the incurable grief of bereavement, a key to that
same aged lady's desperate ill-humour.
The father shook his head with half a smile.
"No, no," said he; "a grand-dame's affection for her children's
children may be great, and her sorrow for their loss, lively; but it
is only the affianced lover, to whom Fate, Faith, and Death have
trebly denied the bliss of union, who mourns what he has lost, as
Justine Marie is still mourned."
I thought the father rather wished to be questioned, and therefore I
inquired who had lost and who still mourned "Justine Marie." I got, in
reply, quite a little romantic narrative, told not unimpressively,
with the accompaniment of the now subsiding storm. I am bound to say
it might have been made much more truly impressive, if there had been
less French, Rousseau-like sentimentalizing and wire-drawing; and
rather more healthful carelessness of effect. But the worthy father
was obviously a Frenchman born and bred (I became more and more
persuaded of his resemblance to my confessor)--he was a true son of
Rome; when he did lift his eyes, he looked at me out of their corners,
with more and sharper subtlety than, one would have thought, could
survive the wear and tear of seventy years. Yet, I believe, he was a
good old man.
The hero of his tale was some former pupil of his, whom he now called
his benefactor, and who, it appears, had loved this pale Justine
Marie, the daughter of rich parents, at a time when his own worldly
prospects were such as to justify his aspiring to a well-dowered hand.
The pupil's father--once a rich banker--had failed, died, and left
behind him only debts and destitution. The son was then forbidden to
think of Marie; especially that old witch of a grand-dame I had seen,
Madame Walravens, opposed the match with all the violence of a temper
which deformity made sometimes demoniac. The mild Marie had neither
the treachery to be false, nor the force to be quite staunch to her
lover; she gave up her first suitor, but, refusing to accept a second
with a heavier purse, withdrew to a convent, and there died in her
noviciate.
Lasting anguish, it seems, had taken possession of the faithful heart
which worshipped her, and the truth of that love and grief had been
shown in a manner which touched even me, as I listened.
Some years after Justine Marie's death, ruin had come on her house
too: her father, by nominal calling a jeweller, but who also dealt a
good deal on the Bourse, had been concerned in some financial
transactions which entailed exposure and ruinous fines. He died of
grief for the loss, and shame for the infamy. His old hunchbacked
mother and his bereaved wife were left penniless, and might have died
too of want; but their lost daughter's once-despised, yet most true-
hearted suitor, hearing of the condition of these ladies, came with
singular devotedness to the rescue. He took on their insolent pride
the revenge of the purest charity--housing, caring for, befriending
them, so as no son could have done it more tenderly and efficiently.
The mother--on the whole a good woman--died blessing him; the strange,
godless, loveless, misanthrope grandmother lived still, entirely
supported by this self-sacrificing man. Her, who had been the bane