I had sojourned, of whose waves a few reviving drops
had trickled to my lips, was bending to another course: it was leaving
my little hut and field forlorn and sand-dry, pouring its wealth of
waters far away. The change was right, just, natural; not a word could
be said: but I loved my Rhine, my Nile; I had almost worshipped my
Ganges, and I grieved that the grand tide should roll estranged,
should vanish like a false mirage. Though stoical, I was not quite a
stoic; drops streamed fast on my hands, on my desk: I wept one sultry
shower, heavy and brief.
But soon I said to myself, "The Hope I am bemoaning suffered and made
me suffer much: it did not die till it was full time: following an
agony so lingering, death ought to be welcome."
Welcome I endeavoured to make it. Indeed, long pain had made patience
a habit. In the end I closed the eyes of my dead, covered its face,
and composed its limbs with great calm.
The letters, however, must be put away, out of sight: people who have
undergone bereavement always jealously gather together and lock away
mementos: it is not supportable to be stabbed to the heart each moment
by sharp revival of regret.
One vacant holiday afternoon (the Thursday) going to my treasure, with
intent to consider its final disposal, I perceived--and this time with
a strong impulse of displeasure--that it had been again tampered with:
the packet was there, indeed, but the ribbon which secured it had been
untied and retied; and by other symptoms I knew that my drawer had
been visited.
This was a little too much. Madame Beck herself was the soul of
discretion, besides having as strong a brain and sound a judgment as
ever furnished a human head; that she should know the contents of my
casket, was not pleasant, but might be borne. Little Jesuit
inquisitress as she was, she could see things in a true light, and
understand them in an unperverted sense; but the idea that she had
ventured to communicate information, thus gained, to others; that she
had, perhaps, amused herself with a companion over documents,
in my eyes most sacred, shocked me cruelly. Yet, that such was the
case I now saw reason to fear; I even guessed her confidant. Her
kinsman, M. Paul Emanuel, had spent yesterday evening with her: she
was much in the habit of consulting him, and of discussing with him
matters she broached to no one else. This very morning, in class, that
gentleman had favoured me with a glance which he seemed to have
borrowed from Vashti, the actress; I had not at the moment
comprehended that blue, yet lurid, flash out of his angry eye; but I
read its meaning now. _He_, I believed, was not apt to regard
what concerned me from a fair point of view, nor to judge me with
tolerance and candour: I had always found him severe and suspicious:
the thought that these letters, mere friendly letters as they were,
had fallen once, and might fall again, into his hands, jarred my very
soul.
What should I do to prevent this? In what corner of this strange house
was it possible to find security or secresy? Where could a key be a
safeguard, or a padlock a barrier?
In the grenier? No, I did not like the grenier. Besides, most of the
boxes and drawers there were mouldering, and did not lock. Rats, too,
gnawed their way through the decayed wood; and mice made nests amongst
the litter of their contents: my dear letters (most dear still, though
Ichabod was written on their covers) might be consumed by vermin;
certainly the writing would soon become obliterated by damp. No; the
grenier would not do--but where then?
While pondering this problem, I sat in the dormitory window-seat. It
was a fine frosty afternoon; the winter sun, already setting, gleamed
pale on the tops of the garden-shrubs in the "allee defendue." One
great old pear-tree--the nun's pear-tree--stood up a tall dryad
skeleton, grey, gaunt, and stripped. A thought struck me--one of those
queer fantastic thoughts that will sometimes strike solitary people. I
put on my bonnet, cloak, and furs, and went out into the city.
Bending my steps to the old historical quarter of the town, whose hoax
and overshadowed precincts I always sought by instinct in melancholy
moods, I wandered on from street to street, till, having crossed a
half deserted "place" or square, I found myself before a sort of
broker's shop; an ancient place, full of ancient things. What I wanted
was a metal box which might be soldered, or a thick glass jar or
bottle which might be stoppered or sealed hermetically. Amongst
miscellaneous heaps, I found and purchased the latter article.
I then made a little roll of my letters, wrapped them in oiled silk,
bound them with twine, and, having put them in the bottle, got the old
Jew broker to stopper, seal, and make it air-tight. While obeying my
directions, he glanced at me now and then suspiciously from under his
frost-white eyelashes. I believe he thought there was some evil deed
on hand. In all this I had a dreary something--not pleasure--but a
sad, lonely satisfaction. The impulse under which I acted, the mood
controlling me, were similar to the impulse and the mood which had
induced me to visit the confessional. With quick walking I regained
the pensionnat just at dark, and in time for dinner.
At seven o'clock the moon rose. At half-past seven, when the pupils
and teachers were at study, and Madame Beck was with her mother and
children in the salle-a-manger, when the half-boarders were all gone
home, and Rosine had left the vestibule, and all was still--I shawled
myself, and, taking the sealed jar, stole out through the first-classe
door, into the berceau and thence into the "allee defendue."
Methusaleh, the pear-tree, stood at the further end of this walk, near
my seat: he rose up, dim and gray, above the lower shrubs round him.
Now Methusaleh, though so very old, was of sound timber still; only
there was a hole, or rather a deep hollow, near his root. I knew there
was such a hollow, hidden partly by ivy and creepers growing thick
round; and there I meditated hiding my treasure. But I was not only
going to hide a treasure--I meant also to bury a grief. That grief
over which I had lately been weeping, as I