best--which was bad, I know: it provoked M. Paul; he fumed.
Putting both--hands to the work, I endeavoured to do better than my
best; I presume he gave me credit for good intentions; he professed to
be partially content. "Ca ira!" he cried; and as voices began sounding
from the garden, and white dresses fluttering among the trees, he
added: "You must withdraw: you must be alone to learn this. Come with
me."
Without being allowed time or power to deliberate, I found myself in
the same breath convoyed along as in a species of whirlwind, up-
stairs, up two pair of stairs, nay, actually up three (for this fiery
little man seemed as by instinct to know his way everywhere); to the
solitary and lofty attic was I borne, put in and locked in, the key
being, in the door, and that key he took with him and vanished.
The attic was no pleasant place: I believe he did not know how
unpleasant it was, or he never would have locked me in with so little
ceremony. In this summer weather, it was hot as Africa; as in winter,
it was always cold as Greenland. Boxes and lumber filled it; old
dresses draped its unstained wall--cobwebs its unswept ceiling. Well
was it known to be tenanted by rats, by black beetles, and by
cockroaches--nay, rumour affirmed that the ghostly Nun of the garden
had once been seen here. A partial darkness obscured one end, across
which, as for deeper mystery, an old russet curtain was drawn, by way
of screen to a sombre band of winter cloaks, pendent each from its
pin, like a malefactor from his gibbet. From amongst these cloaks, and
behind that curtain, the Nun was said to issue. I did not believe
this, nor was I troubled by apprehension thereof; but I saw a very
dark and large rat, with a long tail, come gliding out from that
squalid alcove; and, moreover, my eye fell on many a black-beetle,
dotting the floor. These objects discomposed me more, perhaps, than it
would be wise to say, as also did the dust, lumber, and stifling heat
of the place. The last inconvenience would soon have become
intolerable, had I not found means to open and prop up the skylight,
thus admitting some freshness. Underneath this aperture I pushed a
large empty chest, and having mounted upon it a smaller box, and wiped
from both the dust, I gathered my dress (my best, the reader must
remember, and therefore a legitimate object of care) fastidiously
around me, ascended this species of extempore throne, and being
seated, commenced the acquisition of my task; while I learned, not
forgetting to keep a sharp look-out on the black-beetles and
cockroaches, of which, more even, I believe, than of the rats, I sat
in mortal dread.
My impression at first was that I had undertaken what it really was
impossible to perform, and I simply resolved to do my best and be
resigned to fail. I soon found, however, that one part in so short a
piece was not more than memory could master at a few hours' notice. I
learned and learned on, first in a whisper, and then aloud. Perfectly
secure from human audience, I acted my part before the garret-vermin.
Entering into its emptiness, frivolity, and falsehood, with a spirit
inspired by scorn and impatience, I took my revenge on this "fat," by
making him as fatuitous as I possibly could.
In this exercise the afternoon passed: day began to glide into
evening; and I, who had eaten nothing since breakfast, grew
excessively hungry. Now I thought of the collation, which doubtless
they were just then devouring in the garden far below. (I had seen in
the vestibule a basketful of small _pates a la creme_, than which
nothing in the whole range of cookery seemed to me better). A
_pate_, or a square of cake, it seemed to me would come very
_apropos;_ and as my relish for those dainties increased, it
began to appear somewhat hard that I should pass my holiday, fasting
and in prison. Remote as was the attic from the street-door and
vestibule, yet the ever-tinkling bell was faintly audible here; and
also the ceaseless roll of wheels, on the tormented pavement. I knew
that the house and garden were thronged, and that all was gay and glad
below; here it began to grow dusk: the beetles were fading from my
sight; I trembled lest they should steal on me a march, mount my
throne unseen, and, unsuspected, invade my skirts. Impatient and
apprehensive, I recommenced the rehearsal of my part merely to kill
time. Just as I was concluding, the long-delayed rattle of the key in
the lock came to my ear--no unwelcome sound. M. Paul (I could just see
through the dusk that it _was_ M. Paul, for light enough still
lingered to show the velvet blackness of his close-shorn head, and the
sallow ivory of his brow) looked in.
"Brava!" cried he, holding the door open and remaining at the
threshold. "J'ai tout entendu. C'est assez bien. Encore!"
A moment I hesitated.
"Encore!" said he sternly. "Et point de grimaces! A bas la timidite!"
Again I went through the part, but not half so well as I had spoken it
alone.
"Enfin, elle sait," said he, half dissatisfied, "and one cannot be
fastidious or exacting under the circumstances." Then he added, "You
may yet have twenty minutes for preparation: au revoir!" And he was
going.
"Monsieur," I called out, taking courage.
"Eh bien! Qu'est-ce que c'est, Mademoiselle?"
"J'ai bien faim."
"Comment, vous avez faim! Et la collation?"
"I know nothing about it. I have not seen it, shut up here."
"Ah! C'est vrai," cried he.
In a moment my throne was abdicated, the attic evacuated; an inverse
repetition of the impetus which had brought me up into the attic,
instantly took me down--down--down to the very kitchen. I thought I
should have gone to the cellar. The cook was imperatively ordered to
produce food, and I, as imperatively, was commanded to eat. To my
great joy this food was limited to coffee and cake: I had feared wine
and sweets, which I did not like. How he guessed that I should like a
_petit pate a la creme_ I cannot tell; but he went out and
procured me one from some quarter. With considerable willingness I ate
and drank, keeping the _petit pate_ till the last, as a _bonne
bouche_. M. Paul superintended my repast, and almost forced upon