girls? Did I profess to teach them the
conduct befitting ladies?--and did I permit and, he doubted not,
encourage them to strangle their mother-tongue in their throats, to
mince and mash it between their teeth, as if they had some base cause
to be ashamed of the words they uttered? Was this modesty? He knew
better. It was a vile pseudo sentiment--the offspring or the
forerunner of evil. Rather than submit to this mopping and mowing,
this mincing and grimacing, this, grinding of a noble tongue, this
general affectation and sickening stubbornness of the pupils of the
first class, he would throw them up for a set of insupportable petites
maitresses, and confine himself to teaching the ABC to the babies of
the third division."
What could I say to all this? Really nothing; and I hoped he would
allow me to be silent. The storm recommenced.
"Every answer to his queries was then refused? It seemed to be
considered in _that_ place--that conceited boudoir of a first
classe, with its pretentious book-cases, its green-baized desks, its
rubbish of flower-stands, its trash of framed pictures and maps, and
its foreign surveillante, forsooth!--it seemed to be the fashion to
think _there_ that the Professor of Literature was not worthy of
a reply! These were new ideas; imported, he did not doubt, straight
from 'la Grande Bretagne:' they savoured of island insolence and
arrogance."
Lull the second--the girls, not one of whom was ever known to weep a
tear for the rebukes of any other master, now all melting like snow-
statues before the intemperate heat of M. Emanuel: I not yet much
shaken, sitting down, and venturing to resume my work.
Something--either in my continued silence or in the movement of my
hand, stitching--transported M. Emanuel beyond the last boundary of
patience; he actually sprang from his estrade. The stove stood near my
desk, he attacked it; the little iron door was nearly dashed from its
hinges, the fuel was made to fly.
"Est-ce que vous avez l'intention de m'insulter?" said he to me, in a
low, furious voice, as he thus outraged, under pretence of arranging
the fire.
It was time to soothe him a little if possible.
"Mais, Monsieur," said I, "I would not insult you for the world. I
remember too well that you once said we should be friends."
I did not intend my voice to falter, but it did: more, I think,
through the agitation of late delight than in any spasm of present
fear. Still there certainly was something in M. Paul's anger--a kind
of passion of emotion--that specially tended to draw tears. I was not
unhappy, nor much afraid, yet I wept.
"Allons, allons!" said he presently, looking round and seeing the
deluge universal. "Decidedly I am a monster and a ruffian. I have only
one pocket-handkerchief," he added, "but if I had twenty, I would
offer you each one. Your teacher shall be your representative. Here,
Miss Lucy."
And he took forth and held out to me a clean silk handkerchief. Now a
person who did not know M. Paul, who was unused to him and his
impulses, would naturally have bungled at this offer--declined
accepting the same--et cetera. But I too plainly felt this would never
do: the slightest hesitation would have been fatal to the incipient
treaty of peace. I rose and met the handkerchief half-way, received it
with decorum, wiped therewith my eyes, and, resuming my seat, and
retaining the flag of truce in my hand and on my lap, took especial
care during the remainder of the lesson to touch neither needle nor
thimble, scissors nor muslin. Many a jealous glance did M. Paul cast
at these implements; he hated them mortally, considering sewing a
source of distraction from the attention due to himself. A very
eloquent lesson he gave, and very kind and friendly was he to the
close. Ere he had done, the clouds were dispersed and the sun shining
out--tears were exchanged for smiles.
In quitting the room he paused once more at my desk.
"And your letter?" said he, this time not quite fiercely.
"I have not yet read it, Monsieur."
"Ah! it is too good to read at once; you save it, as, when I was a
boy, I used to save a peach whose bloom was very ripe?"
The guess came so near the truth, I could not prevent a suddenly-
rising warmth in my face from revealing as much.
"You promise yourself a pleasant moment," said he, "in reading that
letter; you will open it when alone--n'est-ce pas? Ah! a smile
answers. Well, well! one should not be too harsh; 'la jeunesse n'a
qu'un temps.'"
"Monsieur, Monsieur!" I cried, or rather whispered after him, as he
turned to go, "do not leave me under a mistake. This is merely a
friend's letter. Without reading it, I can vouch for that."
"Je concois, je concois: on sait ce que c'est qu'un ami. Bonjour,
Mademoiselle!"
"But, Monsieur, here is your handkerchief."
"Keep it, keep it, till the letter is read, then bring it me; I shall
read the billet's tenor in your eyes."
When he was gone, the pupils having already poured out of the
schoolroom into the berceau, and thence into the garden and court to
take their customary recreation before the five-o'clock dinner, I
stood a moment thinking, and absently twisting the handkerchief round
my arm. For some reason--gladdened, I think, by a sudden return of the
golden glimmer of childhood, roused by an unwonted renewal of its
buoyancy, made merry by the liberty of the closing hour, and, above
all, solaced at heart by the joyous consciousness of that treasure in
the case, box, drawer up-stairs,--I fell to playing with the
handkerchief as if it were a ball, casting it into the air and
catching it--as it fell. The game was stopped by another hand than
mine-a hand emerging from a paletot-sleeve and stretched over my
shoulder; it caught the extemporised plaything and bore it away with
these sullen words:
"Je vois bien que vous vous moquez de moi et de mes effets."
Really that little man was dreadful: a mere sprite of caprice and,
ubiquity: one never knew either his whim or his whereabout.
CHAPTER XXII.
THE LETTER.
When all was still in the house; when dinner was over and the noisy
recreation-hour past; when darkness had set in, and the quiet lamp of
study was lit in the refectory; when the externes were gone home, the
clashing door and clamorous bell hushed for the evening; when Madame
was safely settled in the salle-a-manger in