to my lot. Tame and still by habit, disciplined by destiny, I
demanded no walks in the fresh air; my appetite needed no more than
the tiny messes served for the invalid. In addition, she gave me the
originality of her character to study: the steadiness of her virtues,
I will add, the power of her passions, to admire; the truth of her
feelings to trust. All these things she had, and for these things I
clung to her.
For these things I would have crawled on with her for twenty years, if
for twenty years longer her life of endurance had been protracted. But
another decree was written. It seemed I must be stimulated into
action. I must be goaded, driven, stung, forced to energy. My little
morsel of human affection, which I prized as if it were a solid pearl,
must melt in my fingers and slip thence like a dissolving hailstone.
My small adopted duty must be snatched from my easily contented
conscience. I had wanted to compromise with Fate: to escape occasional
great agonies by submitting to a whole life of privation and small
pains. Fate would not so be pacified; nor would Providence sanction
this shrinking sloth and cowardly indolence.
One February night--I remember it well--there came a voice near Miss
Marchmont's house, heard by every inmate, but translated, perhaps,
only by one. After a calm winter, storms were ushering in the spring.
I had put Miss Marchmont to bed; I sat at the fireside sewing. The
wind was wailing at the windows; it had wailed all day; but, as night
deepened, it took a new tone--an accent keen, piercing, almost
articulate to the ear; a plaint, piteous and disconsolate to the
nerves, trilled in every gust.
"Oh, hush! hush!" I said in my disturbed mind, dropping my work, and
making a vain effort to stop my ears against that subtle, searching
cry. I had heard that very voice ere this, and compulsory observation
had forced on me a theory as to what it boded. Three times in the
course of my life, events had taught me that these strange accents in
the storm--this restless, hopeless cry--denote a coming state of the
atmosphere unpropitious to life. Epidemic diseases, I believed, were
often heralded by a gasping, sobbing, tormented, long-lamenting east
wind. Hence, I inferred, arose the legend of the Banshee. I fancied,
too, I had noticed--but was not philosopher enough to know whether
there was any connection between the circumstances--that we often at
the same time hear of disturbed volcanic action in distant parts of
the world; of rivers suddenly rushing above their banks; and of
strange high tides flowing furiously in on low sea-coasts. "Our
globe," I had said to myself, "seems at such periods torn and
disordered; the feeble amongst us wither in her distempered breath,
rushing hot from steaming volcanoes."
I listened and trembled; Miss Marchmont slept.
About midnight, the storm in one half-hour fell to a dead calm. The
fire, which had been burning dead, glowed up vividly. I felt the air
change, and become keen. Raising blind and curtain, I looked out, and
saw in the stars the keen sparkle of a sharp frost.
Turning away, the object that met my eyes was Miss Marchmont awake,
lifting her head from the pillow, and regarding me with unusual
earnestness.
"Is it a fine night?" she asked.
I replied in the affirmative.
"I thought so," she said; "for I feel so strong, so well. Raise me. I
feel young to-night," she continued: "young, light-hearted, and happy.
What if my complaint be about to take a turn, and I am yet destined to
enjoy health? It would be a miracle!"
"And these are not the days of miracles," I thought to myself, and
wondered to hear her talk so. She went on directing her conversation
to the past, and seeming to recall its incidents, scenes, and
personages, with singular vividness."
"I love Memory to-night," she said: "I prize her as my best friend.
She is just now giving me a deep delight: she is bringing back to my
heart, in warm and beautiful life, realities--not mere empty ideas,
but what were once realities, and that I long have thought decayed,
dissolved, mixed in with grave-mould. I possess just now the hours,
the thoughts, the hopes of my youth. I renew the love of my life--its
only love--almost its only affection; for I am not a particularly good
woman: I am not amiable. Yet I have had my feelings, strong and
concentrated; and these feelings had their object; which, in its
single self, was dear to me, as to the majority of men and women, are
all the unnumbered points on which they dissipate their regard. While
I loved, and while I was loved, what an existence I enjoyed! What a
glorious year I can recall--how bright it comes back to me! What a
living spring--what a warm, glad summer--what soft moonlight,
silvering the autumn evenings--what strength of hope under the ice-
bound waters and frost-hoar fields of that year's winter! Through that
year my heart lived with Frank's heart. O my noble Frank--my faithful
Frank--my _good_ Frank! so much better than myself--his standard
in all things so much higher! This I can now see and say: if few women
have suffered as I did in his loss, few have enjoyed what I did in his
love. It was a far better kind of love than common; I had no doubts
about it or him: it was such a love as honoured, protected, and
elevated, no less than it gladdened her to whom it was given. Let me
now ask, just at this moment, when my mind is so strangely clear,--let
me reflect why it was taken from me? For what crime was I condemned,
after twelve months of bliss, to undergo thirty years of sorrow?
"I do not know," she continued after a pause: "I cannot--_cannot_
see the reason; yet at this hour I can say with sincerity, what I
never tried to say before, Inscrutable God, Thy will be done! And at
this moment I can believe that death will restore me to Frank. I never
believed it till now."
"He is dead, then?" I inquired in a low voice.
"My dear girl," she said, "one happy Christmas Eve I dressed and
decorated myself, expecting my lover, very soon to be my husband,
would come that night to visit me. I sat down to wait. Once more I see
that moment--I see the snow twilight stealing through the