it would be certain to find favour: no
grisette has a more facile faculty of acceptance. Strange! for after
all, I know she is a girl of family."
"But you don't know her education, Dr. John," said I. "Tossed about
all her life from one foreign school to another, she may justly
proffer the plea of ignorance in extenuation of most of her faults.
And then, from what she says, I believe her father and mother were
brought up much as she has been brought up."
"I always understood she had no fortune; and once I had pleasure in
the thought," said he.
"She tells me," I answered, "that they are poor at home; she always
speaks quite candidly on such points: you never find her lying, as
these foreigners will often lie. Her parents have a large family: they
occupy such a station and possess such connections as, in their
opinion, demand display; stringent necessity of circumstances and
inherent thoughtlessness of disposition combined, have engendered
reckless unscrupulousness as to how they obtain the means of
sustaining a good appearance. This is the state of things, and the
only state of things, she has seen from childhood upwards."
"I believe it--and I thought to mould her to something better: but,
Lucy, to speak the plain truth, I have felt a new thing to-night, in
looking at her and de Hamal. I felt it before noticing the
impertinence directed at my mother. I saw a look interchanged between
them immediately after their entrance, which threw a most unwelcome
light on my mind."
"How do you mean? You have been long aware of the flirtation they keep
up?"
"Ay, flirtation! That might be an innocent girlish wile to lure on the
true lover; but what I refer to was not flirtation: it was a look
marking mutual and secret understanding--it was neither girlish nor
innocent. No woman, were she as beautiful as Aphrodite, who could give
or receive such a glance, shall ever be sought in marriage by me: I
would rather wed a paysanne in a short petticoat and high cap--and be
sure that she was honest."
I could not help smiling. I felt sure he now exaggerated the case:
Ginevra, I was certain, was honest enough, with all her giddiness. I
told him so. He shook his head, and said he would not be the man to
trust her with his honour.
"The only thing," said I, "with which you may safely trust her. She
would unscrupulously damage a husband's purse and property, recklessly
try his patience and temper: I don't think she would breathe, or let
another breathe, on his honour."
"You are becoming her advocate," said he. "Do you wish me to resume my
old chains?"
"No: I am glad to see you free, and trust that free you will long
remain. Yet be, at the same time, just."
"I am so: just as Rhadamanthus, Lucy. When once I am thoroughly
estranged, I cannot help being severe. But look! the King and Queen
are rising. I like that Queen: she has a sweet countenance. Mamma,
too, is excessively tired; we shall never get the old lady home if we
stay longer."
"I tired, John?" cried Mrs. Bretton, looking at least as animated and
as wide-awake as her son. "I would undertake to sit you out yet: leave
us both here till morning, and we should see which would look the most
jaded by sunrise."
"I should not like to try the experiment; for, in truth, mamma, you
are the most unfading of evergreens and the freshest of matrons. It
must then be on the plea of your son's delicate nerves and fragile
constitution that I found a petition for our speedy adjournment."
"Indolent young man! You wish you were in bed, no doubt; and I suppose
you must be humoured. There is Lucy, too, looking quite done up. For
shame, Lucy! At your age, a week of evenings-out would not have made
me a shade paler. Come away, both of you; and you may laugh at the old
lady as much as you please, but, for my part, I shall take charge of
the bandbox and turban."
Which she did accordingly. I offered to relieve her, but was shaken
off with kindly contempt: my godmother opined that I had enough to do
to take care of myself. Not standing on ceremony now, in the midst of
the gay "confusion worse confounded" succeeding to the King and
Queen's departure, Mrs. Bretton preceded us, and promptly made us a
lane through the crowd. Graham followed, apostrophizing his mother as
the most flourishing grisette it had ever been his good fortune to see
charged with carriage of a bandbox; he also desired me to mark her
affection for the sky-blue turban, and announced his conviction that
she intended one day to wear it.
The night was now very cold and very dark, but with little delay we
found the carriage. Soon we were packed in it, as warm and as snug as
at a fire-side; and the drive home was, I think, still pleasanter than
the drive to the concert. Pleasant it was, even though the coachman--
having spent in the shop of a "marchand de vin" a portion of the time
we passed at the concert--drove us along the dark and solitary
chaussee far past the turn leading down to La Terrasse; we, who were
occupied in talking and laughing, not noticing the aberration till, at
last, Mrs. Bretton intimated that, though she had always thought the
chateau a retired spot, she did not know it was situated at the
world's end, as she declared seemed now to be the case, for she
believed we had been an hour and a half en route, and had not yet
taken the turn down the avenue.
Then Graham looked out, and perceiving only dim-spread fields, with
unfamiliar rows of pollards and limes ranged along their else
invisible sunk-fences, began to conjecture how matters were, and
calling a halt and descending, he mounted the box and took the reins
himself. Thanks to him, we arrived safe at home about an hour and a
half beyond our time.
Martha had not forgotten us; a cheerful fire was burning, and a neat
supper spread in the dining-room: we were glad of both. The winter
dawn was actually breaking before we gained our chambers. I took off
my pink dress and lace mantle with happier feelings than I had
experienced in putting them on. Not all, perhaps, who had shone
brightly arrayed at that concert