I had near twenty francs) "to keep me at a quiet inn
till the day after to-morrow; but I am quite a stranger in Villette,
and don't know the streets and the inns."
"I can give you the address of such an inn as you want," said he; "and
it is not far off: with my direction you will easily find it."
He tore a leaf from his pocket-book, wrote a few words and gave it to
me. I _did_ think him kind; and as to distrusting him, or his
advice, or his address, I should almost as soon have thought of
distrusting the Bible. There was goodness in his countenance, and
honour in his bright eyes.
"Your shortest way will be to follow the Boulevard and cross the
park," he continued; "but it is too late and too dark for a woman to
go through the park alone; I will step with you thus far."
He moved on, and I followed him, through the darkness and the small
soaking rain. The Boulevard was all deserted, its path miry, the water
dripping from its trees; the park was black as midnight. In the double
gloom of trees and fog, I could not see my guide; I could only follow
his tread. Not the least fear had I: I believe I would have followed
that frank tread, through continual night, to the world's end.
"Now," said he, when the park was traversed, "you will go along this
broad street till you come to steps; two lamps will show you where
they are: these steps you will descend: a narrower street lies below;
following that, at the bottom you will find your inn. They speak
English there, so your difficulties are now pretty well over.
Good-night."
"Good-night, sir," said I: "accept my sincerest thanks." And we
parted.
The remembrance of his countenance, which I am sure wore a light not
unbenignant to the friendless--the sound in my ear of his voice, which
spoke a nature chivalric to the needy and feeble, as well as the
youthful and fair--were a sort of cordial to me long after. He was a
true young English gentleman.
On I went, hurrying fast through a magnificent street and square, with
the grandest houses round, and amidst them the huge outline of more
than one overbearing pile; which might be palace or church--I could
not tell. Just as I passed a portico, two mustachioed men came
suddenly from behind the pillars; they were smoking cigars: their
dress implied pretensions to the rank of gentlemen, but, poor things!
they were very plebeian in soul. They spoke with insolence, and, fast
as I walked, they kept pace with me a long way. At last I met a sort
of patrol, and my dreaded hunters were turned from the pursuit; but
they had driven me beyond my reckoning: when I could collect my
faculties, I no longer knew where I was; the staircase I must long
since have passed. Puzzled, out of breath, all my pulses throbbing in
inevitable agitation, I knew not where to turn. It was terrible to
think of again encountering those bearded, sneering simpletons; yet
the ground must be retraced, and the steps sought out.
I came at last to an old and worn flight, and, taking it for granted
that this must be the one indicated, I descended them. The street into
which they led was indeed narrow, but it contained no inn. On I
wandered. In a very quiet and comparatively clean and well-paved
street, I saw a light burning over the door of a rather large house,
loftier by a story than those round it. _This_ might be the inn
at last. I hastened on: my knees now trembled under me: I was getting
quite exhausted.
No inn was this. A brass-plate embellished the great porte-cochere:
"Pensionnat de Demoiselles" was the inscription; and beneath, a name,
"Madame Beck."
I started. About a hundred thoughts volleyed through my mind in a
moment. Yet I planned nothing, and considered nothing: I had not time.
Providence said, "Stop here; this is _your_ inn." Fate took me in
her strong hand; mastered my will; directed my actions: I rang the
door-bell.
While I waited, I would not reflect. I fixedly looked at the street-
stones, where the door-lamp shone, and counted them and noted their
shapes, and the glitter of wet on their angles. I rang again. They
opened at last. A bonne in a smart cap stood before me.
"May I see Madame Beck?" I inquired.
I believe if I had spoken French she would not have admitted me; but,
as I spoke English, she concluded I was a foreign teacher come on
business connected with the pensionnat, and, even at that late hour,
she let me in, without a word of reluctance, or a moment of
hesitation.
The next moment I sat in a cold, glittering salon, with porcelain
stove, unlit, and gilded ornaments, and polished floor. A pendule on
the mantel-piece struck nine o'clock.
A quarter of an hour passed. How fast beat every pulse in my frame!
How I turned cold and hot by turns! I sat with my eyes fixed on the
door--a great white folding-door, with gilt mouldings: I watched to
see a leaf move and open. All had been quiet: not a mouse had stirred;
the white doors were closed and motionless.
"You ayre Engliss?" said a voice at my elbow. I almost bounded, so
unexpected was the sound; so certain had I been of solitude.
No ghost stood beside me, nor anything of spectral aspect; merely a
motherly, dumpy little woman, in a large shawl, a wrapping-gown, and a
clean, trim nightcap.
I said I was English, and immediately, without further prelude, we
fell to a most remarkable conversation. Madame Beck (for Madame Beck
it was--she had entered by a little door behind me, and, being shod
with the shoes of silence, I had heard neither her entrance nor
approach)--Madame Beck had exhausted her command of insular speech
when she said, "You ayre Engliss," and she now proceeded to work away
volubly in her own tongue. I answered in mine. She partly understood
me, but as I did not at all understand her--though we made together an
awful clamour (anything like Madame's gift of utterance I had not
hitherto heard or imagined)--we achieved little progress. She rang,
ere long, for aid; which arrived in the shape of a "maitresse," who
had been partly educated in an Irish convent, and was esteemed a
perfect adept in the English language.