exclusively confined
his notice. She appeared satisfied, and passed to the drawing-room in
very good spirits.
Yet, no sooner had we reached that place of refuge, than she again
became flat and listless: throwing herself on a couch, she denounced
both the "discours" and the dinner as stupid affairs, and inquired of
her cousin how she could hear such a set of prosaic "gros-bonnets" as
her father gathered about him. The moment the gentlemen were heard to
move, her railings ceased: she started up, flew to the piano, and
dashed at it with spirit. Dr. Bretton entering, one of the first, took
up his station beside her. I thought he would not long maintain that
post: there was a position near the hearth to which I expected to see
him attracted: this position he only scanned with his eye; while
_he_ looked, others drew in. The grace and mind of Paulina
charmed these thoughtful Frenchmen: the fineness of her beauty, the
soft courtesy of her manner, her immature, but real and inbred tact,
pleased their national taste; they clustered about her, not indeed to
talk science; which would have rendered her dumb, but to touch on many
subjects in letters, in arts, in actual life, on which it soon
appeared that she had both read and reflected. I listened. I am sure
that though Graham stood aloof, he listened too: his hearing as well
as his vision was very fine, quick, discriminating. I knew he gathered
the conversation; I felt that the mode in which it was sustained
suited him exquisitely--pleased him almost to pain.
In Paulina there was more force, both of feeling and character; than
most people thought--than Graham himself imagined--than she would ever
show to those who did not wish to see it. To speak truth, reader,
there is no excellent beauty, no accomplished grace, no reliable
refinement, without strength as excellent, as complete, as
trustworthy. As well might you look for good fruit and blossom on a
rootless and sapless tree, as for charms that will endure in a feeble
and relaxed nature. For a little while, the blooming semblance of
beauty may flourish round weakness; but it cannot bear a blast: it
soon fades, even in serenest sunshine. Graham would have started had
any suggestive spirit whispered of the sinew and the stamina
sustaining that delicate nature; but I who had known her as a child,
knew or guessed by what a good and strong root her graces held to the
firm soil of reality.
While Dr. Bretton listened, and waited an opening in the magic circle,
his glance restlessly sweeping the room at intervals, lighted by
chance on me, where I sat in a quiet nook not far from my godmother
and M. de Bassompierre, who, as usual, were engaged in what Mr. Home
called "a two-handed crack:" what the Count would have interpreted as
a tete-a-tete. Graham smiled recognition, crossed the room, asked me
how I was, told me I looked pale. I also had my own smile at my own
thought: it was now about three months since Dr. John had spoken to
me-a lapse of which he was not even conscious. He sat down, and became
silent. His wish was rather to look than converse. Ginevra and Paulina
were now opposite to him: he could gaze his fill: he surveyed both
forms--studied both faces.
Several new guests, ladies as well as gentlemen, had entered the room
since dinner, dropping in for the evening conversation; and amongst
the gentlemen, I may incidentally observe, I had already noticed by
glimpses, a severe, dark, professorial outline, hovering aloof in an
inner saloon, seen only in vista. M. Emanuel knew many of the
gentlemen present, but I think was a stranger to most of the ladies,
excepting myself; in looking towards the hearth, he could not but see
me, and naturally made a movement to approach; seeing, however, Dr.
Bretton also, he changed his mind and held back. If that had been all,
there would have been no cause for quarrel; but not satisfied with
holding back, he puckered up his eyebrows, protruded his lip, and
looked so ugly that I averted my eyes from the displeasing spectacle.
M. Joseph Emanuel had arrived, as well as his austere brother, and at
this very moment was relieving Ginevra at the piano. What a master-
touch succeeded her school-girl jingle! In what grand, grateful tones
the instrument acknowledged the hand of the true artist!
"Lucy," began Dr. Bretton, breaking silence and smiling, as Ginevra
glided before him, casting a glance as she passed by, "Miss Fanshawe
is certainly a fine girl."
Of course I assented.
"Is there," he pursued, "another in the room as lovely?"
"I think there is not another as handsome."
"I agree with you, Lucy: you and I do often agree in opinion, in
taste, I think; or at least in judgment."
"Do we?" I said, somewhat doubtfully.
"I believe if you had been a boy, Lucy, instead of a girl--my mother's
god-son instead of her god-daughter, we should have been good friends:
our opinions would have melted into each other."
He had assumed a bantering air: a light, half-caressing, half-ironic,
shone aslant in his eye. Ah, Graham! I have given more than one
solitary moment to thoughts and calculations of your estimate of Lucy
Snowe: was it always kind or just? Had Lucy been intrinsically the
same but possessing the additional advantages of wealth and station,
would your manner to her, your value for her, have been quite what
they actually were? And yet by these questions I would not seriously
infer blame. No; you might sadden and trouble me sometimes; but then
mine was a soon-depressed, an easily-deranged temperament--it fell if
a cloud crossed the sun. Perhaps before the eye of severe equity I
should stand more at fault than you.
Trying, then, to keep down the unreasonable pain which thrilled my
heart, on thus being made to feel that while Graham could devote to
others the most grave and earnest, the manliest interest, he had no
more than light raillery for Lucy, the friend of lang syne, I inquired
calmly,--"On what points are we so closely in accordance?"
"We each have an observant faculty. You, perhaps, don't give me credit
for the possession; yet I have it."
"But you were speaking of tastes: we may see the same objects, yet
estimate them differently?"
"Let us bring it to the test. Of course, you cannot but render homage
to the merits of Miss Fanshawe: now, what do you think of others