what to you is an abstract
idea; they have, ere this, sold their social greatness and also their
blood-earned freedom to be the servants of foreign kings."
"You never were in Switzerland?"
"Yes--I have been there twice."
"You know nothing of it."
"I do."
"And you say the Swiss are mercenary, as a parrot says 'Poor Poll,' or
as the Belgians here say the English are not brave, or as the French
accuse them of being perfidious: there is no justice in your dictums."
"There is truth."
"I tell you, Mr. Hunsden, you are a more unpractical man than I am an
unpractical woman, for you don't acknowledge what really exists; you
want to annihilate individual patriotism and national greatness as
an atheist would annihilate God and his own soul, by denying their
existence."
"Where are you flying to? You are off at a tangent--I thought we were
talking about the mercenary nature of the Swiss."
"We were--and if you proved to me that the Swiss are mercenary to-morrow
(which you cannot do) I should love Switzerland still."
"You would be mad, then--mad as a March hare--to indulge in a passion
for millions of shiploads of soil, timber, snow, and ice."
"Not so mad as you who love nothing."
"There's a method in my madness; there's none in yours."
"Your method is to squeeze the sap out of creation and make manure of
the refuse, by way of turning it to what you call use."
"You cannot reason at all," said Hunsden; "there is no logic in you."
"Better to be without logic than without feeling," retorted Frances, who
was now passing backwards and forwards from her cupboard to the table,
intent, if not on hospitable thoughts, at least on hospitable deeds, for
she was laying the cloth, and putting plates, knives and forks thereon.
"Is that a hit at me, mademoiselle? Do you suppose I am without
feeling?"
"I suppose you are always interfering with your own feelings, and those
of other people, and dogmatizing about the irrationality of this, that,
and the other sentiment, and then ordering it to be suppressed because
you imagine it to be inconsistent with logic."
"I do right."
Frances had stepped out of sight into a sort of little pantry; she soon
reappeared.
"You do right? Indeed, no! You are much mistaken if you think so. Just
be so good as to let me get to the fire, Mr. Hunsden; I have something
to cook." (An interval occupied in settling a casserole on the fire;
then, while she stirred its contents:) "Right! as if it were right to
crush any pleasurable sentiment that God has given to man, especially
any sentiment that, like patriotism, spreads man's selfishness in wider
circles" (fire stirred, dish put down before it).
"Were you born in Switzerland?"
"I should think so, or else why should I call it my country?"
"And where did you get your English features and figure?"
"I am English, too; half the blood in my veins is English; thus I have
a right to a double power of patriotism, possessing an interest in two
noble, free, and fortunate countries."
"You had an English mother?"
"Yes, yes; and you, I suppose, had a mother from the moon or from
Utopia, since not a nation in Europe has a claim on your interest?"
"On the contrary, I'm a universal patriot, if you could understand me
rightly: my country is the world."
"Sympathies so widely diffused must be very shallow: will you have
the goodness to come to table. Monsieur" (to me who appeared to be now
absorbed in reading by moonlight)--"Monsieur, supper is served."
This was said in quite a different voice to that in which she had been
bandying phrases with Mr. Hunsden--not so short, graver and softer.
"Frances, what do you mean by preparing, supper? we had no intention of
staying."
"Ah, monsieur, but you have stayed, and supper is prepared; you have
only the alternative of eating it."
The meal was a foreign one, of course; it consisted in two small but
tasty dishes of meat prepared with skill and served with nicety; a salad
and "fromage francais," completed it. The business of eating interposed
a brief truce between the belligerents, but no sooner was supper
disposed of than they were at it again. The fresh subject of dispute
ran on the spirit of religious intolerance which Mr. Hunsden affirmed to
exist strongly in Switzerland, notwithstanding the professed attachment
of the Swiss to freedom. Here Frances had greatly the worst of it,
not only because she was unskilled to argue, but because her own real
opinions on the point in question happened to coincide pretty nearly
with Mr. Hunsden's, and she only contradicted him out of opposition. At
last she gave in, confessing that she thought as he thought, but bidding
him take notice that she did not consider herself beaten.
"No more did the French at Waterloo," said Hunsden.
"There is no comparison between the cases," rejoined Frances; "mine was
a sham fight."
"Sham or real, it's up with you."
"No; though I have neither logic nor wealth of words, yet in a case
where my opinion really differed from yours, I would adhere to it when
I had not another word to say in its defence; you should be baffled by
dumb determination. You speak of Waterloo; your Wellington ought to have
been conquered there, according to Napoleon; but he persevered in spite
of the laws of war, and was victorious in defiance of military tactics.
I would do as he did."
"I'll be bound for it you would; probably you have some of the same sort
of stubborn stuff in you.
"I should be sorry if I had not; he and Tell were brothers, and I'd
scorn the Swiss, man or woman, who had none of the much-enduring nature
of our heroic William in his soul."
"If Tell was like Wellington, he was an ass."
"Does not ASS mean BAUDET?" asked Frances, turning to me.
"No, no," replied I, "it means an ESPRIT-FORT; and now," I continued, as
I saw that fresh occasion of strife was brewing between these two, "it
is high time to go."
Hunsden rose. "Good bye," said he to Frances; "I shall be off for this
glorious England to-morrow, and it may be twelve months or more before
I come to Brussels again; whenever I do come I'll seek you out, and
you shall see if I don't find means to make you fiercer than a dragon.
You've done pretty well this evening, but next interview you shall
challenge me outright. Meantime