truth; I like seeking the goddess in her temple, and handling
the veil, and daring the dread glance. O Titaness among deities! the
covered outline of thine aspect sickens often through its uncertainty,
but define to us one trait, show us one lineament, clear in awful
sincerity; we may gasp in untold terror, but with that gasp we drink
in a breath of thy divinity; our heart shakes, and its currents sway
like rivers lifted by earthquake, but we have swallowed strength. To
see and know the worst is to take from Fear her main advantage.
The Walravens' party, augmented in numbers, now became very gay. The
gentlemen fetched refreshments from the kiosk, all sat down on the
turf under the trees; they drank healths and sentiments; they laughed,
they jested. M. Emanuel underwent some raillery, half good-humoured,
half, I thought, malicious, especially on Madame Beck's part. I soon
gathered that his voyage had been temporarily deferred of his own
will, without the concurrence, even against the advice, of his
friends; he had let the _Antigua_ go, and had taken his berth in
the _Paul et Virginie_, appointed to sail a fortnight later. It
was his reason for this resolve which they teased him to assign, and
which he would only vaguely indicate as "the settlement of a little
piece of business which he had set his heart upon." What _was_
this business? Nobody knew. Yes, there was one who seemed partly, at
least, in his confidence; a meaning look passed between him and
Justine Marie. "La petite va m'aider--n'est-ce pas?" said he. The
answer was prompt enough, God knows?
"Mais oui, je vous aiderai de tout mon coeur. Vous ferez de moi tout
ce que vous voudrez, mon parrain."
And this dear "parrain" took her hand and lifted it to his grateful
lips. Upon which demonstration, I saw the light-complexioned young
Teuton, Heinrich Muehler, grow restless, as if he did not like it. He
even grumbled a few words, whereat M. Emanuel actually laughed in his
face, and with the ruthless triumph of the assured conqueror, he drew
his ward nearer to him.
M. Emanuel was indeed very joyous that night. He seemed not one whit
subdued by the change of scene and action impending. He was the true
life of the party; a little despotic, perhaps, determined to be chief
in mirth, as well as in labour, yet from moment to moment proving
indisputably his right of leadership. His was the wittiest word, the
pleasantest anecdote, the frankest laugh. Restlessly active, after his
manner, he multiplied himself to wait on all; but oh! I saw which was
his favourite. I saw at whose feet he lay on the turf, I saw whom he
folded carefully from the night air, whom he tended, watched, and
cherished as the apple of his eye.
Still, hint and raillery flew thick, and still I gathered that while
M. Paul should be absent, working for others, these others, not quite
ungrateful, would guard for him the treasure he left in Europe. Let
him bring them an Indian fortune: they would give him in return a
young bride and a rich inheritance. As for the saintly consecration,
the vow of constancy, that was forgotten: the blooming and charming
Present prevailed over the Past; and, at length, his nun was indeed
buried.
Thus it must be. The revelation was indeed come. Presentiment had not
been mistaken in her impulse: there is a kind of presentiment which
never _is_ mistaken; it was I who had for a moment miscalculated;
not seeing the true bearing of the oracle, I had thought she muttered
of vision when, in truth, her prediction touched reality.
I might have paused longer upon what I saw; I might have deliberated
ere I drew inferences. Some, perhaps, would have held the premises
doubtful, the proofs insufficient; some slow sceptics would have
incredulously examined ere they conclusively accepted the project of a
marriage between a poor and unselfish man of forty, and his wealthy
ward of eighteen; but far from me such shifts and palliatives, far
from me such temporary evasion of the actual, such coward fleeing from
the dread, the swift-footed, the all-overtaking Fact, such feeble
suspense of submission to her the sole sovereign, such paltering and
faltering resistance to the Power whose errand is to march conquering
and to conquer, such traitor defection from the TRUTH.
No. I hastened to accept the whole plan. I extended my grasp and took
it all in. I gathered it to me with a sort of rage of haste, and
folded it round me, as the soldier struck on the field folds his
colours about his breast. I invoked Conviction to nail upon me the
certainty, abhorred while embraced, to fix it with the strongest
spikes her strongest strokes could drive; and when the iron had
entered well my soul, I stood up, as I thought, renovated.
In my infatuation, I said, "Truth, you are a good mistress to your
faithful servants! While a Lie pressed me, how I suffered! Even when
the Falsehood was still sweet, still flattering to the fancy, and warm
to the feelings, it wasted me with hourly torment. The persuasion that
affection was won could not be divorced from the dread that, by
another turn of the wheel, it might be lost. Truth stripped away
Falsehood, and Flattery, and Expectancy, and here I stand--free!"
Nothing remained now but to take my freedom to my chamber, to carry it
with me to my bed and see what I could make of it. The play was not
yet, indeed, quite played out. I might have waited and watched longer
that love-scene under the trees, that sylvan courtship. Had there been
nothing of love in the demonstration, my Fancy in this hour was so
generous, so creative, she could have modelled for it the most salient
lineaments, and given it the deepest life and highest colour of
passion. But I _would_ not look; I had fixed my resolve, but I
would not violate my nature. And then--something tore me so cruelly
under my shawl, something so dug into my side, a vulture so strong in
beak and talon, I must be alone to grapple with it. I think I never
felt jealousy till now. This was not like enduring the endearments of
Dr. John and Paulina, against which while I sealed my eyes and my
ears, while I withdrew thence my thoughts, my sense of harmony still
acknowledged in it a charm. This was an outrage. The love