those of the philanthropist as the physician. I understood
presently that cheerfully, habitually, and in single-minded
unconsciousness of any special merit distinguishing his deeds--he was
achieving, amongst a very wretched population, a world of active good.
The lower orders liked him well; his poor, patients in the hospitals
welcomed him with a sort of enthusiasm.
But stop--I must not, from the faithful narrator, degenerate into the
partial eulogist. Well, full well, do I know that Dr. John was not
perfect, anymore than I am perfect. Human fallibility leavened him
throughout: there was no hour, and scarcely a moment of the time I
spent with him that in act or speech, or look, he did not betray
something that was not of a god. A god could not have the cruel vanity
of Dr. John, nor his sometime levity., No immortal could have
resembled him in his occasional temporary oblivion of all but the
present--in his passing passion for that present; shown not coarsely,
by devoting it to material indulgence, but selfishly, by extracting
from it whatever it could yield of nutriment to his masculine self-
love: his delight was to feed that ravenous sentiment, without thought
of the price of provender, or care for the cost of keeping it sleek
and high-pampered.
The reader is requested to note a seeming contradiction in the two
views which have been given of Graham Bretton--the public and private
--the out-door and the in-door view. In the first, the public, he is
shown oblivious of self; as modest in the display of his energies, as
earnest in their exercise. In the second, the fireside picture, there
is expressed consciousness of what he has and what he is; pleasure in
homage, some recklessness in exciting, some vanity in receiving the
same. Both portraits are correct.
It was hardly possible to oblige Dr. John quietly and in secret. When
you thought that the fabrication of some trifle dedicated to his use
had been achieved unnoticed, and that, like other men, he would use it
when placed ready for his use, and never ask whence it came, he amazed
you by a smilingly-uttered observation or two, proving that his eye
had been on the work from commencement to close: that he had noted the
design, traced its progress, and marked its completion. It pleased him
to be thus served, and he let his pleasure beam in his eye and play
about his mouth.
This would have been all very well, if he had not added to such kindly
and unobtrusive evidence a certain wilfulness in discharging what he
called debts. When his mother worked for him, he paid her by
showering about her his bright animal spirits, with even more
affluence than his gay, taunting, teasing, loving wont. If Lucy Snowe
were discovered to have put her hand to such work, he planned, in
recompence, some pleasant recreation.
I often felt amazed at his perfect knowledge of Villette; a knowledge
not merely confined to its open streets, but penetrating to all its
galleries, salles, and cabinets: of every door which shut in an object
worth seeing, of every museum, of every hall, sacred to art or
science, he seemed to possess the "Open! Sesame." I never had a head
for science, but an ignorant, blind, fond instinct inclined me to art.
I liked to visit the picture-galleries, and I dearly liked to be left
there alone. In company, a wretched idiosyncracy forbade me to see
much or to feel anything. In unfamiliar company, where it was
necessary to maintain a flow of talk on the subjects in presence, half
an hour would knock me up, with a combined pressure of physical
lassitude and entire mental incapacity. I never yet saw the well-
reared child, much less the educated adult, who could not put me to
shame, by the sustained intelligence of its demeanour under the ordeal
of a conversable, sociable visitation of pictures, historical sights
or buildings, or any lions of public interest. Dr. Bretton was a
cicerone after my own heart; he would take me betimes, ere the
galleries were filled, leave me there for two or three hours, and call
for me when his own engagements were discharged. Meantime, I was
happy; happy, not always in admiring, but in examining, questioning,
and forming conclusions. In the commencement of these visits, there
was some misunderstanding and consequent struggle between Will and
Power. The former faculty exacted approbation of that which it was
considered orthodox to admire; the latter groaned forth its utter
inability to pay the tax; it was then self-sneered at, spurred up,
goaded on to refine its taste, and whet its zest. The more it was
chidden, however, the more it wouldn't praise. Discovering gradually
that a wonderful sense of fatigue resulted from these conscientious
efforts, I began to reflect whether I might not dispense with that
great labour, and concluded eventually that I might, and so sank
supine into a luxury of calm before ninety-nine out of a hundred of
the exhibited frames.
It seemed to me that an original and good picture was just as scarce
as an original and good book; nor did I, in the end, tremble to say to
myself, standing before certain _chef-d'oeuvres_ bearing great
names, "These are not a whit like nature. Nature's daylight never had
that colour: never was made so turbid, either by storm or cloud, as it
is laid out there, under a sky of indigo: and that indigo is not
ether; and those dark weeds plastered upon it are not trees." Several
very well executed and complacent-looking fat women struck me as by no
means the goddesses they appeared to consider themselves. Many scores
of marvellously-finished little Flemish pictures, and also of
sketches, excellent for fashion-books displaying varied costumes in
the handsomest materials, gave evidence of laudable industry
whimsically applied. And yet there were fragments of truth here and
there which satisfied the conscience, and gleams of light that cheered
the vision. Nature's power here broke through in a mountain snow-
storm; and there her glory in a sunny southern day. An expression in
this portrait proved clear insight into character; a face in that
historical painting, by its vivid filial likeness, startlingly
reminded you that genius gave it birth. These exceptions I loved: they
grew dear as friends.
One day, at a quiet early hour, I found myself nearly alone in a
certain gallery, wherein one particular picture of portentous size,
set up in the best light, having a cordon of protection stretched
before it, and a cushioned bench duly set