lit et mon menage; I seek my dinner in a restaurant; my
supper takes care, of itself; I pass days laborious and loveless;
nights long and lonely; I am ferocious, and bearded and monkish; and
nothing now living in this world loves me, except some old hearts worn
like my own, and some few beings, impoverished, suffering, poor in
purse and in spirit, whom the kingdoms of this world own not, but to
whom a will and testament not to be disputed has bequeathed the
kingdom of heaven."
"Ah, Monsieur; but I know!"
"What do you know? many things, I verily believe; yet not me, Lucy!"
"I know that you have a pleasant old house in a pleasant old square of
the Basse-Ville--why don't you go and live there?"
"Hein?" muttered he again.
"I liked it much, Monsieur; with the steps ascending to the door, the
grey flags in front, the nodding trees behind--real trees, not shrubs
--trees dark, high, and of old growth. And the boudoir-oratoire--you
should make that room your study; it is so quiet and solemn."
He eyed me closely; he half-smiled, half-coloured. "Where did you pick
up all that? Who told you?" he asked.
"Nobody told me. Did I dream it, Monsieur, do you think?"
"Can I enter into your visions? Can I guess a woman's waking thoughts,
much less her sleeping fantasies?"
"If I dreamt it, I saw in my dream human beings as well as a house. I
saw a priest, old, bent, and grey, and a domestic--old, too, and
picturesque; and a lady, splendid but strange; her head would scarce
reach to my elbow--her magnificence might ransom a duke. She wore a
gown bright as lapis-lazuli--a shawl worth a thousand francs: she was
decked with ornaments so brilliant, I never saw any with such a
beautiful sparkle; but her figure looked as if it had been broken in
two and bent double; she seemed also to have outlived the common years
of humanity, and to have attained those which are only labour and
sorrow. She was become morose--almost malevolent; yet _somebody_,
it appears, cared for her in her infirmities--somebody forgave her
trespasses, hoping to have his trespasses forgiven. They lived
together, these three people--the mistress, the chaplain, the servant
--all old, all feeble, all sheltered under one kind wing."
He covered with his hand the upper part of his face, but did not
conceal his mouth, where I saw hovering an expression I liked.
"I see you have entered into my secrets," said he, "but how was it
done?"
So I told him how--the commission on which I had been sent, the storm
which had detained me, the abruptness of the lady, the kindness of the
priest.
"As I sat waiting for the rain to cease, Pere Silas whiled away the
time with a story," I said.
"A story! What story? Pere Silas is no romancist."
"Shall I tell Monsieur the tale?"
"Yes: begin at the beginning. Let me hear some of Miss Lucy's French--
her best or her worst--I don't much care which: let us have a good
poignee of barbarisms, and a bounteous dose of the insular accent."
"Monsieur is not going to be gratified by a tale of ambitious
proportions, and the spectacle of the narrator sticking fast in the
midst. But I will tell him the title--the 'Priest's Pupil.'"
"Bah!" said he, the swarthy flush again dyeing his dark cheek. "The
good old father could not have chosen a worse subject; it is his weak
point. But what of the 'Priest's Pupil?'"
"Oh! many things."
You may as well define _what_ things. I mean to know."
"There was the pupil's youth, the pupil's manhood;--his avarice, his
ingratitude, his implacability, his inconstancy. Such a bad pupil,
Monsieur!--so thankless, cold-hearted, unchivalrous, unforgiving!
"Et puis?" said he, taking a cigar.
"Et puis," I pursued, "he underwent calamities which one did not pity
--bore them in a spirit one did not admire--endured wrongs for which
one felt no sympathy; finally took the unchristian revenge of heaping
coals of fire on his adversary's head."
"You have not told me all," said he.
"Nearly all, I think: I have indicated the heads of Pere Silas's
chapters."
"You have forgotten one-that which touched on the pupil's lack of
affection--on his hard, cold, monkish heart."
"True; I remember now. Pere Silas _did_ say that his vocation was
almost that of a priest--that his life was considered consecrated."
"By what bonds or duties?"
"By the ties of the past and the charities of the present."
"You have, then, the whole situation?"
"I have now told Monsieur all that was told me."
Some meditative minutes passed.
"Now, Mademoiselle Lucy, look at me, and with that truth which I
believe you never knowingly violate, answer me one question. Raise
your eyes; rest them on mine; have no hesitation; fear not to trust
me--I am a man to be trusted."
I raised my eyes.
"Knowing me thoroughly now--all my antecedents, all my
responsibilities--having long known my faults, can you and I still be
friends?"
"If Monsieur wants a friend in me, I shall be glad to have a friend in
him."
"But a close friend I mean--intimate and real--kindred in all but
blood. Will Miss Lucy be the sister of a very poor, fettered,
burdened, encumbered man?"
I could not answer him in words, yet I suppose I _did_ answer
him; he took my hand, which found comfort, in the shelter of his.
_His_ friendship was not a doubtful, wavering benefit--a cold,
distant hope--a sentiment so brittle as not to bear the weight of a
finger: I at once felt (or _thought_ I felt) its support like
that of some rock.
"When I talk of friendship, I mean _true_ friendship," he
repeated emphatically; and I could hardly believe that words so
earnest had blessed my ear; I hardly could credit the reality of
that kind, anxious look he gave. If he _really_ wished for my
confidence and regard, and _really_ would give me his--why, it
seemed to me that life could offer nothing more or better. In that
case, I was become strong and rich: in a moment I was made
substantially happy. To ascertain the fact, to fix and seal it, I
asked--
"Is Monsieur quite serious? Does he really think he needs me, and can
take an interest in me as a sister?"
"Surely, surely," said he; "a lonely man like me, who has no sister,
must be but too glad to find in some woman's heart a sister's pure
affection."
"And dare I rely on Monsieur's regard? Dare I speak to him when I am
so inclined?"
"My little sister must