own dwelling; but immediately after
there fluttered from, the lattice a falling object, white and light
--billet the second, of course.
"There!" I ejaculated involuntarily.
"Where?", asked Dr. John with energy, making direct for the window.
"What, is it?"
"They have gone and done it again," was my reply. "A handkerchief
waved and something fell:" and I pointed to the lattice, now closed
and looking hypocritically blank.
"Go, at once; pick it up and bring it here," was his prompt direction;
adding, "Nobody will take notice of _you: I_ should be seen."
Straight I went. After some little search, I found a folded paper,
lodged on the lower branch of a shrub; I seized and brought it direct
to Dr. John. This time, I believe not even Rosine saw me.
He instantly tore the billet into small pieces, without reading it.
"It is not in the least _her_ fault, you must remember," he said,
looking at me.
"_Whose_ fault?" I asked. "_Who_ is it?"
"You don't yet know, then?"
"Not in the least."
"Have you no guess?"
"None."
"If I knew you better, I might be tempted to risk some confidence, and
thus secure you as guardian over a most innocent and excellent, but
somewhat inexperienced being."
"As a duenna?" I asked.
"Yes," said he abstractedly. "What snares are round her!" he added,
musingly: and now, certainly for the first time, he examined my face,
anxious, doubtless, to see if any kindly expression there, would
warrant him in recommending to my care and indulgence some
ethereal creature, against whom powers of darkness were plotting.
I felt no particular vocation to undertake the surveillance of
ethereal creatures; but recalling the scene at the bureau, it seemed
to me that I owed _him_ a good turn: if I _could_ help him then I
would, and it lay not with me to decide how. With as little reluctance
as might be, I intimated that "I was willing to do what I could
towards taking care of any person in whom he might be interested.".
"I am no farther interested than as a spectator," said he, with a
modesty, admirable, as I thought, to witness. "I happen to be
acquainted with the rather worthless character of the person, who,
from the house opposite, has now twice invaded the, sanctity of this
place; I have also met in society the object at whom these vulgar
attempts are aimed. Her exquisite superiority and innate refinement
ought, one would think, to scare impertinence from her very idea. It
is not so, however; and innocent, unsuspicious as she is, I would
guard her from evil if I could. In person, however, I can do nothing I
cannot come near her"--he paused.
"Well, I am willing to help you," said I, "only tell me how." And
busily, in my own mind, I ran over the list of our inmates, seeking
this paragon, this pearl of great price, this gem without flaw. "It
must be Madame," I concluded. "_She_ only, amongst us all, has
the art even to _seem_ superior: but as to being unsuspicious,
inexperienced, &c., Dr. John need not distract himself about that.
However, this is just his whim, and I will not contradict him; he
shall be humoured: his angel shall be an angel.
"Just notify the quarter to which my care is to be directed," I
continued gravely: chuckling, however, to myself over the thought of
being set to chaperon Madame Beck or any of her pupils. Now Dr. John
had a fine set of nerves, and he at once felt by instinct, what no
more coarsely constituted mind would have detected; namely, that I was
a little amused at him. The colour rose to his cheek; with half a
smile he turned and took his hat--he was going. My heart smote me.
"I will--I will help you," said I eagerly. "I will do what you wish. I
will watch over your angel; I will take care of her, only tell me who
she is."
"But you _must_ know," said he then with earnestness, yet
speaking very low. "So spotless, so good, so unspeakably beautiful!
impossible that one house should contain two like her. I allude, of
course--"
Here the latch of Madame Beck's chamber-door (opening into the
nursery) gave a sudden click, as if the hand holding it had been
slightly convulsed; there was the suppressed explosion of an
irrepressible sneeze. These little accidents will happen to the best
of us. Madame--excellent woman! was then on duty. She had come home
quietly, stolen up-stairs on tip-toe; she was in her chamber. If she
had not sneezed, she would have heard all, and so should I; but that
unlucky sternutation routed Dr. John. While he stood aghast, she came
forward alert, composed, in the best yet most tranquil spirits: no
novice to her habits but would have thought she had just come in, and
scouted the idea of her ear having been glued to the key-hole for at
least ten minutes. She affected to sneeze again, declared she was
"enrhumee," and then proceeded volubly to recount her "courses en
fiacre." The prayer-bell rang, and I left her with the doctor.
CHAPTER XIV.
THE FETE.
As soon as Georgette was well, Madame sent her away into the country.
I was sorry; I loved the child, and her loss made me poorer than
before. But I must not complain. I lived in a house full of robust
life; I might have had companions, and I chose solitude. Each of the
teachers in turn made me overtures of special intimacy; I tried them
all. One I found to be an honest woman, but a narrow thinker, a coarse
feeler, and an egotist. The second was a Parisienne, externally
refined--at heart, corrupt--without a creed, without a principle,
without an affection: having penetrated the outward crust of decorum
in this character, you found a slough beneath. She had a wonderful
passion for presents; and, in this point, the third teacher--a person
otherwise characterless and insignificant--closely resembled her. This
last-named had also one other distinctive property--that of avarice.
In her reigned the love of money for its own sake. The sight of a
piece of gold would bring into her eyes a green glisten, singular to
witness. She once, as a mark of high favour, took me up-stairs, and,
opening a secret door, showed me a hoard--a mass of coarse, large
coin--about fifteen guineas, in five-franc pieces. She loved this
hoard as a bird loves its eggs. These were her savings. She would come
and talk to me about them with an infatuated and persevering dotage,
strange